Part 1





Bob Version 1.0



“So… You’ll cut my head off.” I raised an eyebrow at the salescritter. I was baiting him. I knew it, he knew it, I knew he knew it.

He grinned at me, happy to go along with the routine as long as me and my wallet continued to pay attention. “Mr. Johansson—”

“It’s Bob. Please. You’re not talking to my father.”

The CryoEterna sales rep—the nametag identified him as Kevin—nodded and gestured toward the big placard, which displayed the cryonics process in ghoulish detail. I took a moment to note his Armani suit and hundred-dollar haircut. It appeared there was money in Cryonics.

“Bob, there’s no point in freezing the entire body. Remember, the idea is to wait for advancements in medicine to be able to cure whatever killed you. By the time they can resuscitate your corpse, they’ll likely be able to grow you a whole new body. That would be easier, in fact, than trying to patch up the old one.”

That’s just insane enough to be true. “All right, Kevin, I’m sold.” I looked down at the papers he’d set out in front of me. “Ten thousand deposit, annual payments, insurance…” Kevin stood patiently, letting me scan the information without interruption. I might be drunk with my newfound wealth, but almost a decade as an engineer and a business owner wouldn’t let me do anything without checking all the documentation.

Finally, I was satisfied. I signed the paperwork, wrote a cheque, and shook hands with Kevin.

“You are now a client of CryoEterna Inc.” he said, handing me a card. “Keep this in your wallet at all times. In case of death, we will be contacted. Once death has been pronounced, we will—”

“—behead me.”

“Yup. And freeze your head, pending medical advances sufficient to bring you back. The guidelines for setting up a Trust are in your information package.” Kevin handed me a thick, bright blue folder with a barely visible cloud pattern, and the corporate logo emblazoned on the front. “We’ll have the formal documents printed up and mailed to your home address. And welcome to CryoEterna.” With that, he stuck out his hand and we shook again.

I did a little skip-step as I left the CryoEterna office. The Trust had already been set up, but I didn’t want Kevin to know I had decided to sign up before I even walked into the office. No point in making his job too easy. I couldn’t decide if this was a canny investment in my future or a mind-blowingly stupid waste of money. Well, what the hell. The sum that Terasoft was paying me for my software company ensured financial stability for the rest of my life—and now, beyond.

Not to mention a significant upgrade in my lifestyle. I’d been attending The Vortex SF convention every year since they first started up in Las Vegas, but this year I wasn’t part of the riff-raff. As I walked the two blocks from the CryoEterna offices to the convention, I pulled the VIP pass out of my pocket and put the lanyard around my neck. This pass gave me many extras over the standard item—access to hospitality suites, ability to bypass line-ups for autographings, and reserved spaces for panels, among other things. I’d also bought a pass for Jenny—

And, there it was. I’d invoked She Who Must Not Be Named. I stopped dead in the middle of the sidewalk, earning glares from tailgaters and a muttered curse from a Jedi Knight wannabe. I began deep-breathing to still the panic attack. This time, it took only moments to get myself under control. Nothing like practice, I guess. I was still having several panic attacks per day, but that was way down from just after the breakup. It was like having a bad tooth—you keep poking at it with your tongue, even knowing that it’s going to hurt each time.

With a conscious act of will, I brought my thoughts back on track. I’d taken advantage of the VIP pass by reserving a space in a couple of back-to-back panels, and the first one was starting in less than fifteen minutes. Exploring the Galaxy featured Lawrence Vienn as one of the speakers. He was a popular and prolific science fiction author, and many of his story concepts had helped shape the modern genre.

It took only a couple of minutes to get to the convention center and find the seminar rooms. Con staffers had already gotten the VIPs seated and were about to let everyone else enter when I pulled up, panting and waving my pass. The attendant motioned me in with no more than a glance.

I got an aisle seat by pure fluke. As I rushed into the room, someone stood up right in front of me and turned to walk out. Without breaking stride, I slid into the vacant seat, and the woman seated beside me did a double-take. She must have thought the other guy had morphed.

I turned my head to watch as they opened the doors to the common rabble. People poured into the conference room until attendants had to close the doors or face The Wrath of the Fire Marshal. The Las Vegas hotels tended to have good air conditioning—no one wanted distracted or uncomfortable clients—but a lot of the attendees had been in costume for too long. I tried to breathe through my mouth while hoping the ventilation would eventually catch up.

In typical con fashion, very little concession had been made for aesthetics. The tables and chairs were the standard folding variety, and the session information was written on a large whiteboard. In black marker, because I guess color would be too much bother.

No one cared.

The moderator, a short, round black man with a permanent smile, called for attention. “Good afternoon, gentlebeings. Today, we’ll be hearing from Lawrence Vienn—” Spontaneous cheering forced him to pause. “—who will talk about the technological and economic prerequisites to get interstellar probes into space. After that, Dr. Gerald Carlisle—” More cheers. “—will talk about the biology of extraterrestrial life. We’re looking forward to a great panel today. So, without further ado, I give you Mr. Vienn.”

The applause went on for several minutes. Lawrence smiled patiently through it, and gave the occasional wave. Finally it died down, and I settled in for a good listen.

***

I sniffed at my clothing, just to make sure I hadn’t picked up some of the odor from the room. The second panel had been even more ripe than the first. If not for the subject matter, I’d have bailed. But any discussion of Von Neumann probes was like catnip.

I decided I wouldn’t need to change before meeting my soon-to-be-ex-employees for lunch.

I left the convention center and headed for the agreed-upon restaurant, grinning at the spectacle around me. Science-fiction conventions inevitably spilled out onto the streets. Storm troopers, Chewbaccae, and Enterprise crewcritters wandered everywhere. Throngs of fans filled the sidewalks and crossed the streets with or without traffic light assist. I’d seen more than a few exchanges of middle fingers, accompanied by suggestions of an autoerotic nature. Great fun. Fans packed the restaurants twenty-four-seven, but the waitstaff didn’t complain—nerds tend to overtip. I’d heard that the casinos were less happy with the level of gambling. Turns out nerds understand probability.

I made it to the restaurant without losing any body parts, and found my group.

***

“To Terasoft!” Carl raised his glass as he gave the toast.

“Terasoft.” The rest of us raised our glasses in response.

Carl, Karen, and Alan had been my first hires at InterGator Software. They had been loyal and patient through the early hard times, and I had made them shareholders in the company. My engineering design and analysis application had eventually grown to be the number one product in its niche, out-selling competitors like Terasoft by a significant margin.

Terasoft reacted with a truly eye-popping buy-out offer, and we were now all sharing in the windfall. These three might still have to work for a living, but they wouldn’t have to make mortgage or car payments.

I had invited the trio to spend the week in Las Vegas on my dime. Only Carl took me up on the offer of the VIP con pass, the other two pleading sanity. Alan and Karen stated their intention to see every single Las Vegas show. At several per day, they looked like they were approaching saturation.

“How are you holding up, Bob?” Carl looked at me with one eyebrow raised.

“Pretty good. I signed with CryoEterna this morning…” Karen made a low growling sound and looked away. She didn’t need to say anything; she’d already made her opinion very clear on that subject.

I waggled my eyebrows at her and continued, “And I just went to a couple of very interesting panels. Exploring the Galaxy and Designing a Von Neumann Probe.”

Alan laughed. “No theme there, not at all. Engineers. Jeez.”

“Yeah, but how are you doing, Bob?” Carl gave me the hairy eyeball.

Carl had managed to navigate the tricky pathway of being an employee and becoming a friend, without looking like he was brown-nosing. I guess I owed him the courtesy of not pretending to misunderstand.

“A lot better, Carl. ‘Jenny’ episodes are down to a couple a day. I might even be ready to rejoin the human race, soon.”

“The woman was an idiot,” Karen muttered. “You should have taken your mother up on her offer.”

That forced a chuckle from me. “My mother doesn’t actually know how to arrange a hit, Karen. I don’t think.” I pulled out my phone and glanced at it. “Speaking of which, she texted me. I’ll have to phone her back soon, or she’ll just keep sending more texts. She’s kind of like the terminator, that way.”

“So it is genetic!”

I mimed exaggerated laughter at Carl and he grinned back, unrepentant. After a moment, he waved a hand dismissively and changed the subject. “Anyway, part of the purpose of coming to the con this year was as a distraction from the breakup, right? So how were the panels?”

Karen groaned, and I leaned forward to put my elbows on the table. “Really interesting. Dr. Carlisle theorizes that life will generally be similar on different planets with similar climates, and maybe even digestible by humans. Panspermia, ya know. Common biological origins.”

“Horse cookies.”

“No, seriously, Alan. He gave a pretty good argument for a common chemical basis for life. Not Star Trek level compatible, but we could probably subsist on an alien ecosystem.”

“I’ll wait and see,” Alan said. “How about the other one? Space probes?”

“Von Neumann probes. Automated probes that reproduce as they visit star systems. Turns out nanites are out and 3D printers are in for self-replication.”

Carl nodded. “As advancing technology leaves fiction behind, again.”

“Wait, what?” Alan said, looking perplexed.

Carl and I both smiled indulgently. Alan was not a science geek, despite a background in software development. I gestured with my hands as I described the idea. “You’ve seen 3D printers, right? Printing things like plastic parts, medical prosthetics, and toys?” At his nod, I continued, “So take it to the next level. Have them able to deliver any element, one atom at a time, according to a design. You could, in principle, print literally anything solid.”

“Including parts to make more probes,” Carl added, “using whatever elements they find in the systems they visit.”

Alan glanced at me. “This would work?”

“I minored in physics, Alan, you guys know that. I think it’s completely plausible.” I paused for a moment to taste my beer, then looked around at the others. “And the engineering—”

“You’re really going to freeze your head?”

We all turned to face Karen. “Here we go,” Alan muttered.

She glared at Alan, then at me. “When they revive you—if they revive you—it’ll probably be long after everyone you know is dead.”

“Including Jenny…” Alan said, sotto voce.

Karen glared at him again. “Whatever. Your family will be dead. Your friends will be dead. How are you good with that?”

I looked at her for a moment, considering my response. “I’m a humanist, Karen. You know that. No afterlife. If I die, my choices are revival or nothing. I’ll take my chances with whatever I wake up to.”

Karen’s expression grew even more thunderous, and she opened her mouth for a retort. Fortunately, the waiter picked that moment to arrive with our lunch. The odor of hamburgers, caramelized onions, and vinegarized fries wafted around the table as the plates were set down in front of us. By the time the food was distributed, the moment of tension had dissipated.

***

I dropped a trail of shoes and clothes behind me and settled onto the king-sized bed. The daily rate on the executive suite was ludicrous, but the luxurious bed alone was worth the price. One could get used to this. Oh, yes.

I set the alarm so I wouldn’t sleep the whole afternoon, and pulled out my phone. My mother really would keep texting me if I didn’t call her back.

The phone rang twice at the other end before her voice came on. “Hi Robert. Has it been a year already?”

“Hah hah. Hi Mom. Got your text. No, I don’t need a contract taken out on what’s-her-face, thanks. I’m at The Vortex, having a great time. K, bye.”

She laughed into the phone. This was a game we always played. I acted impatient and tried to end the call, but we both knew I’d stay on as long as she wanted.

“I’m fine Robert, thanks for asking.”

“And how are the mosquitos?”

“The mosquitos are fine. They miss you and your delicate Nordic skin. Are there no mosquitos in San Diego?”

“Not like Minnesota, Mom. One of the reasons I moved there.”

“Hmm. And how are you doing, son? The offer’s still open on what’s-her-face. I knows deze guys…”

“Thanks, but I don’t want to have to visit you in jail.” I sighed. “Look, Mom. People cheat. It happens. We weren’t married yet. I’d have hated to find out after we tied the knot. I’m good, now. Really.”

Can you hear disbelief? My mother didn’t say a word. Maybe it was her breathing. Whatever, I decided it was a good time to change the subject. “So how’s everyone?”

“Your father’s fine. He’s in the workshop, still trying to get that pile o’ junk to start. Your sisters are here for a visit, by the way. They visit their poor ailing mother. Andrea is motioning that she’d like to mock you for a bit.”

“Okay, put her on. I need my massive ego kicked out from under me.”

There was some muffled conversation, then, “Hi little brother.”

“I’m older than you.”

“Not what I meant.”

I smiled to myself at the sound of her voice and at the traditional exchange. Andrea, Alaina, and myself were as close as siblings could be. The two girls were twins only in that they were born at the same time. They had literally twelve inches difference in height between them. And Andrea never let me forget that she had an inch on me as well.

“So, rich guy, how are things out in Silicone Valley?” I could hear the smile in Andrea’s voice. She’d been doing this comedy routine ever since I’d moved west.

“It’s Silicon, Andrea. And that’s in Frisco.”

“I watch TMZ. I stand by my comment.”

“Ooh, the butt-hurt is strong in this one…”

Andrea laughed. We spent a few minutes more exchanging insults, updating news bites, then I told her to say hi to Alaina and Dad for me.

Thank God for family. And thank God for a couple thousand miles of distance. When everyone was home at the same time, I could generally take it for about half an hour before I retreated into the basement. Usually, Dad followed about ten minutes later. There’d be the mutual eye-rolling, and we’d settle down without a word, to read or watch TV. My father and I were both loners by disposition. We could sit in the same room for hours, not say five words to each other, and both be completely comfortable. It drove my mother crazy.

***

I was surprised when the alarm went off. I hadn’t intended to fall asleep. I jumped out of bed and got ready as quickly as I could. I would be meeting the gang for dinner, but I wanted to spend some time at the actual convention. The Vortex was a three-day gyrating bag of crazy, and I wanted to catch as much of it as I could. You couldn’t truly say you’d been to a science fiction con until you’d been run over by Farscape cosplayers, threatened by at least one drunken Darth, and had bought a cheap plastic movie prop for more than its weight in gold. Woo hah.



The elevator opened, and I stepped out into the lobby. The doorman nodded to me as I approached, and held the door open. As usual, I wasn’t sure if I should tip him or not. I decided to give him a large tip when I checked out, just in case.

The Las Vegas air hit like a hammer when I stepped out of the air-conditioned hotel. I stopped and let a gaggle of Enterprise crewcritters, several Ferengi, two Chewbaccas, and a storm trooper wander past. They were loud, truculent, and appeared to have been sampling Terran alcohol to excess. After a few seconds of semi-coherent argument, they turned and crossed the street more or less as a unit.

I smiled and shook my head, then I walked the extra fifty feet to the crosswalk. I wasn’t in that much of a hurry. As I started to cross, I heard a flurry of hurled insults, blaring horns, and squealing tires.

I turned toward the noise, and everything went into slow motion. The car came around the group, the driver’s mouth moving as he leaned out the window. He turned forward and looked right at me, and his eyes went wide. Tires squealed as the car went into a four-wheel lock.

You have GOT to be kidding me!

There was a flash of light, a moment of unimaginable pain…

***

I could hear voices. Urgent voices, calling out about codes. Someone in the background declaring that they had a right to be there. Something about a power of attorney, last will and testament. Angry responses. A calm voice, much closer, mentioning time of death…

The voices and the light faded, and the world ended.





Bob Version 2.0



I snapped back to consciousness. There was no transition, none of the normal vagueness you get when you wake up. I remembered the car coming at me, which I thought was odd. I would have expected the last few seconds to be lost as they didn’t have time to enter long-term memory. On the other hand, maybe the last few seconds had been lost.

I lay there, without moving or opening my eyes, and did careful inventory. I felt no pain. In fact, I couldn’t feel my arms, my legs, or my body at all. I was getting none of the normal proprioceptive cues that would tell me if I were lying down, comfortable, or anything. Not really a good sign—complete paralysis seemed a likely explanation.

I experienced a moment of panic, followed immediately by a kind of bemused surprise. The panic seemed to be purely intellectual. I had no sensation of elevated breathing, increased heart-rate, or fight-or-flight muscle tension. Nothing. While I was normally very analytical, this seemed especially Vulcan, even for me.

Wow. Am I paralyzed from the forehead down? Maybe I’m in an induced coma? If so, it’s not a very good one.

Gathering my resolve, I opened my eyes.

Or tried to. Nothing happened. This time, I did panic. Being blind was the stuff of nightmares for me. For a few moments, my thoughts spun out of control. I thought of movies I would never see, books I would never read.

But again, the panic didn’t self-reinforce. No adrenaline rush, no nothing. I couldn’t think of a medical condition that would do that. Maybe drugs. Good ones.

I was getting a little weirded out. Over and above the panic thing, I mean. I decided on drugs as a good working hypothesis.

Determined to get a handle on things, I tried again, really thought about opening my eyes. The mechanics, the feeling of my eyes opening…

And with no transition, I could see! There are no words to describe my relief with that small victory.

I appeared to be sitting up, since I was looking at a wall instead of a ceiling. The room could be a hospital room, or a lab, or any nondescript government office. The walls were painted in that peculiar off-white tone that new construction always seemed to start out with. The far wall had a large window, currently shielded by white, uh, something. I thought at first it might be Venetian blinds, but they seemed to be actually printed on the glass.

I expected to see part of my body in the foreground, perhaps under plain hospital sheets. But instead, there was just a flat plane, like maybe a desktop.

Just beyond the flat plane, a man sat, consulting a tablet. He looked, I kid you not, exactly how most of us visualize Sigmund Freud, right down to the lab coat. He can’t actually be a shrink. That would just be too cliché. Is he here to talk to me about my injuries? It has to be pretty bad if they have a counselor ready and waiting for me to wake up.

There was something off about him, though. The shirt he was wearing looked almost clerical in cut. And his watch…

It took me a moment longer to realize I was experiencing a problem with perspective. The room seemed to be deep and narrow, and Freud seemed to be about six feet from front to back. In fact, when he turned his head, his nose seemed to stick about a foot out from his face.

As I examined this odd optical illusion, I felt a shifting sensation and heard a whirring sound, and the perspective corrected itself. Before I could begin to analyze the sensation and sound, Freud looked up and smiled. “Good. You’re awake.”

I tried to respond, but what came out was something like a cross between a cough and static. For God’s sake, that sounded like a voice synthesizer having a breakdown.

Freud put down the tablet, leaned forward, and rested his arms on the desk or table or whatever. “Please keep trying. It can take a few attempts for the GUPPI interface to mesh.”

I considered what he’d said. It immediately brought up three points. Point one, I wasn’t dead. Well, okay, I think therefore I am, yadda yadda. Call that one proven. Point two, I wasn’t good as new— in fact I appeared to be speaking through a voice synthesizer. But doing so by mental control, which meant, point three, that the technology had advanced significantly since I’d been hit by the car. How long had I been out? And what the heck was a guppy interface?

I tried again, concentrating on forming the words. “Xzjjzzjjj… Someone want to zhixxxjx fill me in on what’s going on?”

Freud clapped his hands, once. “Excellent. I am Dr. Landers, Bob. I will answer any questions you have, and I will help to prepare you for your new life.”

New life…? What’s wrong with my old one? I already don’t like where this is going.

Dr. Landers pulled the tablet over so that it was directly in front of him. “So, Bob, what’s the last thing you remember?”

“A car coming right at me. I was sure it was going to hit me. I’m pretty sure it did.”

“It did indeed, Bob. You arrived at the hospital in critical condition with a very poor prognosis. Per your contract with CryoEterna, they were standing by with a cryocontainer when time of death was pronounced.”

“Well, good to know my money wasn’t wasted, anyway. So what year is it?”

Dr. Landers laughed. “So nice to talk to a subject so quick on the uptake. It is June 24, 2133, and we are currently in New Handeltown, which would have been Portland in your day.”

I was surprised by that. So that’s… [117] years. Wait, where did that come from?

I’d always been able to do math in my head with no effort, but it normally required me to at least go through the calculation steps. This answer had arrived as if spoken in my ear. Huh. Something to investigate later. Add to TO-DO list.

I turned my attention back to the doctor. The shirt made a little more sense, now. Styles would change in a hundred-plus years. I really wanted to get a look at that watch, though.

“Who’s Handel?” I asked.

“Ah, now, Bob, we’re getting ahead of ourselves. I have an established script for bringing candidates up to date, and history lessons come later.”

“So what happened to Old Handeltown?”

Dr. Landers smiled and shook his head in mock sorrow.

I sighed and nodded. Well, I tried to nod. My field of view didn’t move. So I had control over my eyes but not my head. I was starting to suspect some kind of locked-in syndrome.

Instead, I grunted. “Right, so can we talk about how much of me is still human? This artificial voice thing tells me that you haven’t been able to make me good as new. How much is Borg? Should I ask for a mirror, or would that be a bad idea?”

“Ah…” Dr. Landers glanced down at his tablet and hesitated, then looked back at me. “It would be inaccurate to compare you to a Borg. If I remember my Trek trivia correctly, they are at least partly human. I think Mr. Data would be a better comparison.”

I simply stared at him for what seemed like forever. My mind was blank. I couldn’t seem to form a thought.

Finally, I found my voice. “Zhzzjjjz… Excuse me?” I noted almost in passing that I still wasn’t having a panic attack. For the first time, I suspected I knew why.

“You, Bob, are what most people would call an Artificial Intelligence, although that’s not strictly accurate. You are a copy of the mind of Robert Johansson, created by scanning his cryogenically frozen brain at the subcellular level and converting the data into a computer simulation. You are, essentially, a computer program that thinks it’s Robert Johansson. A replicant.”

“Does that mean I’m immortal, then?”

Dr. Landers looked startled for a moment, then threw his head back and laughed. “That is definitely not the reaction I normally get. We seem to have skipped the denial phase entirely. I’m feeling more and more confident about our decision to replicate you.”

“Well, thanks. I think. So then I’m… that is, Bob is still alive? Or still dead? I mean, still in cryo?”

“No, I’m afraid not.” Dr. Landers shifted uncomfortably in his chair. “The recording process is destructive. We have to thaw the brain sufficiently to be able to measure the synaptic potentials, without allowing ice crystals to form. Chemicals are involved which render the brain non-viable. There’s no point in trying to re-freeze it afterwards.”

The revelation hit me with a jolt, almost like touching a live wire. I don’t know why I should be more bothered by the fact of original Bob being dead. Either way, I was a computer program. But somehow, the idea that I was all that was left of Bob felt like being stabbed. I had been—Bob had been—discarded.

“But… but that means you killed me!”

The doctor sighed. “And that’s the cue for the history lesson.”

He settled himself more comfortably in his chair and assumed that far-off expression people get when they’re lecturing. “In 2036, the USA elected an over-the-top, unapologetic fundamentalist president named Andrew Handel. Yes, that Handel. During his term, he tried to ban election of non-Christians to any public post, and tried to remove the constitutional separation between church and state. He was nominated, supported, and elected based on his religious views, rather than on his political or fiscal expertise. And of course, he appointed persons of similar persuasion to every post he could manage, in some cases blatantly ignoring laws and procedures. He and his cronies rammed through far-right policies with no thought for consequences. In a number of cases, when challenged on the results, he declared that God would not allow their just cause to fail. He eventually brought the USA to its knees in an economic collapse that made the 2008 recession look like a picnic in the park.”

Dr. Landers tapped his tablet absent-mindedly. It was obvious to me that he knew the whole spiel by rote.

“In the next election, the public voted in the USA’s first—and only—overtly atheist president, Desmond Ahearn, mostly in reaction to the Handel travesty. Needless to say, the religious right went ballistic. In 2041, they staged a successful coup. And thus was born the Free American Independent Theocratic Hegemony.”

It took me perhaps a millisecond to parse out the acronym. I groaned. “How long do you suppose it took them to work that out?”

Dr. Landers frowned. “The official history doesn’t mention Ahearn or the coup at all, and Handel is credited with being voted in after running on a platform of creating a theocracy. And just so you know, Bob, criticism of the government is a felony, punishable by, er, re-education. It’s certainly something to be avoided. As a machine, though, you’d just be deactivated. Part of my job is to instruct you in right-thinking so you can become a good servant of the state.”

“Are you going to get in trouble at all? Some of your comments seem, you know, insufficiently respectful.”

“The Ministry of Truth, which is backing this venture, is surprisingly pragmatic. They are concerned with results, and have guaranteed us that they will not interfere as long as they get what they’re paying for.” The doctor frowned. “Some of the other ministries, maybe less so. We are cautious during any ministry visits.”

“Got it. So anyway, I get to live out my days operating a garbage truck or something, as a good servant of the state?”

“Ah, well, on that subject… You see, one of the first acts of the new theocracy was to declare all cryogenic facilities blasphemous and all corpsicles truly dead. They confiscated the clients’ assets—all those fiscal vehicles that you and others had set up to pay for your long-term storage. And finally they auctioned off all the cryo companies’ assets. Which included a bunch of deep-frozen clients with no legal standing.”

“Auctioned us off? Wouldn’t the properly orthodox thing to do be to bury us? Not that I’m advocating that right now, you understand…”

Dr. Landers looked angry for a moment. “Did theologues limit themselves to logical or consistent behavior in your day?”

“Point taken.” I considered the doctor’s explanation. “So I actually belong to someone?”

“To the company I work for, as a matter of fact. Applied Synergetics Inc. is engaged in a sort of economic competition with Total Cyber Systems to supply robotic servants to society. We attempt to integrate replicants into useful machinery, while TCS creates artificial machine intelligences, AMIs, from the ground up.”

I chuckled. Or tried to. What came out of the voice synthesizer was a long way from what I intended.

Dr. Landers winced. “That’ll get better. Don’t worry. By the end of this session, your voice will be indistinguishable from human. And to answer the unspoken but obvious question, AMIs at the moment are only authorized for very, very simple tasks with low risk or heavy supervision. Some years ago, some AMI-based pest-control equipment at a local mall had a psychotic break and decided people qualified as targets. Dozens of patrons were hurt, and several were killed before they deactivated the devices.”

I chuckled again. This time it sounded less like a printer jamming.

“On the other hand,” Dr. Landers continued, “replicants aren’t any better at multitasking than they were when alive. Which is why we add the GUPPI interface to offload tasks. And about four out of five replicants go insane when they discover what has been done to them.”

He looked in my direction with a wry expression. “Not to mention that most cryo subjects were wealthy, and don’t take well to the idea of becoming indentured servants in their next life.”

The image of some ex-CEO being told he would now be driving a garbage truck made me laugh out loud.

“…So we can find it difficult to get the right replicant for the right job. And a certain percentage go insane anyway after a while.”

That was a sobering thought. I had a bad feeling that I might be looking down that particular chasm later. Right now, this all felt like it was happening to someone else. Questions about individuality and the existence of souls poked at the edge of my awareness. With an effort I pushed them away, to concentrate on the now.

“Eighty percent failure rate kind of sucks, doc. How do you stay in business?”

“One success, Bob, can be installed in many units. Most of the mining equipment in operation today is controlled by one Rudolf Kazini, who was a miner in his former life as well. Matching temperament to task is the key.” The doctor hesitated for a moment, then added, “And, of course, we cultivate multiple candidates.”

I tried to raise my non-existent eyebrows and I was annoyed when nothing happened. “Am I in a competition, then?”

“Well, yes and no. We have activated five candidates for this project. Statistically, four of you will go insane and be purged. If more than one of you gets through the training phase with your sanity intact, then yes, we’ll have to make a choice. The project requires only one replicant.”

“And the loser?”

Dr. Landers shrugged. “Garbage truck. Or maybe just stored pending another opportunity.”

Not good. Not good at all. The prospect of going insane wasn’t exactly at the top of my bucket list, but the idea of cheating death—more or less—then just being relegated to menial labor, really sucked. Being turned off, even more so. It would appear that I was in a competition, and one with the highest of stakes for me.

I was going to have to take this very seriously. And I would have to assume that the other candidates were equally well suited to whatever task the project required. I would simply have to be better. And the first step was information-gathering.

“So, what’s the job?”

“There’s really no point in discussing specifics at this early stage. It would be a distraction, at best.”

Well, no joy, there. “Can you tell me about my opponents?”

“No, Bob. There’s no reason to. You’ll never meet them. Best that you not humanize them in any way.”

That made sense, in a very cold, clinical way. But I wasn’t making much headway on the information-gathering front, so far.

“Okay. Next question. Why am I not more panicked about all of this? This is absolutely bizarre. I’m dead. I mean, original me is dead. I’m a computer program. I’m property. Why am I not running in tight little circles, waving my hands in the air? Apart from the obvious reason, I mean.”

The doctor smirked, but he didn’t really seem amused. “We can’t modify your personality, Bob. It’s an emergent property. Attempts to do so have resulted in, ah, non-viable subjects. So it’s all or nothing. But we can control the endocrine simulation routines. Panic depends on a feedback loop involving adrenaline. We simply limit that. You can’t panic or get angry or frightened, you can only be deeply concerned, so to speak.”

“And with that, you still have an 80% failure rate?” I tried to wave a hand. I had always talked with my hands a lot, so when that failed as well, I said in exasperation, “Say, am I going to get some appendages at some point? This Jack the Bodiless business is getting on my nerves, er, circuits. Whatever.”

Dr. Landers nodded. “Actually, Bob, I think we’ve made very good progress today. You were obviously a very rational person and are handling this better than I could have hoped for. We’ll continue tomorrow, and I’ll see if I can get you some peripherals.”

Dr. Landers lifted his tablet and poked at it.

“Wait, no, I—”





Bob – June 25, 2133



I snapped back to consciousness. I could see that Dr. Landers wore a different colored shirt, still in that weird clerical style, so I assumed it was at least a day later. He was concentrating on his tablet, and just starting to look up.

I poked at my own psyche, looking for any trace of panic, insanity, or even deep concern. It didn’t feel like being doped up. I’d been doped up, like when I was getting my wisdom teeth out. I didn’t enjoy that sensation. I also had never enjoyed the sensation of getting drunk, of not being in control of my own mind.

In this case, I was in complete control of my thoughts. In fact, I felt at the top of my game, like I did when I first got into the office after an excellent night’s sleep. Like no problem or puzzle could possibly stand before me.

On the other hand, my parents were long since dead, my sisters as well. Alan, Karen, Carl, all the people that I’d known. I had a clear mental image of Karen glaring at me, arms crossed, I told you so written across her face. But thoughts of my family and friends brought only a mild feeling of regret, likely due to the endocrine controls. That, more than simply the fact of being software, made me feel less than human.

It was hard to be upset with Dr. Landers about the situation. There didn’t seem to be any malice involved. Events had just evolved logically over time, and culminated with me as a computer program. And so far, this state of being seemed to have its advantages. If Bob was dead—if he’d been run over by a car—then this was basically a free life. A potentially immortal one, no less. Maybe I’d just roll with it, at least for the moment. I could always re-evaluate if I ended up in second place. Be careful what you wish for. No kidding.

So what else came with being a glorified computer program? Maybe I could communicate with that guppy interface.

Systems Check. Square root of 234,215.

[483.957642]

Damn, that’s cool. Do I have a date function? Current Date.

[2133-06-25.08:42:24.235]

Woo hoo, I’m Data. “At the tone, the time will be eight forty-three. Beeeeep.”

Dr. Landers looked surprised for a moment, then laughed. “You have a number of functions like that, Bob. You just need to learn how to access them. Part of your training will concentrate on that area.”

I tried to nod out of habit and was surprised when my field of view bobbed. “Hey, I’ve got neck control!” I swiveled my ‘head,’ and found to my delight that I could rotate my field of vision all the way around like an owl. The room presented no surprises. As I suspected, I was actually on a desk. Beside me was a waldo, a remote-manipulator arm. It was small and very basic compared to industrial models, just a two-digit pincer grip, with a shoulder, elbow, and wrist joint. I decided to see if it was accessible. After all, that was probably on the agenda for today.

It seemed to take forever—although my date/time function said less than a half-second had elapsed—before the waldo moved at my command. I waved it around and snapped at the air with the pincer, then turned back to Dr. Landers.

The doctor stared at the waldo with a bemused expression. Then a smile slowly formed, and he said with a wry shake of his head, “For today’s exercise, we’ll get you to attempt to move a manipulator arm.”

He shook his head and sighed. “So much for today’s training schedule. Bob, you’re doing very well, so far. I think we’ll bump up the roamer test. I’d originally scheduled this for a week from now after some more preliminary orientation, but…”

Dr. Landers picked up the tablet and aimed a finger.

Oh, not again. “Wait! No, don’t do—”

***

I found myself in a different room in the same institutional off-white color. A rack on one wall contained some [32] small mechanical devices. In front of each device, a red light glowed. Directly in front of me was a table with a number [128] of blocks.

The far wall contained a window, and Dr. Landers stood on the other side. “Will you please stop doing that!” I said. I attempted to glare at him.

“Would you prefer that I pick you up and carry you around under my arm?” Dr. Landers held a poker face for a couple of seconds, then smiled. “Actually, you and the other candidates all reside in large, expensive cubes of electronics tucked safely away in an air-conditioned room elsewhere on the premises. I’m merely switching your peripheral functions from room to room. The you in this room is a stereoscopic camera on a mechanical arm.”

He waited for any comments from me, but I had nothing at the moment. He gestured toward the rack. “The shelves contain remote observation and manipulation devices, or ROAMers. Your goal will be to stack the blocks using as many roamers as possible. We’ll start with one roamer, to give you the feel of it.”

Dr. Landers played with his tablet, and the light in front of one of the devices on the rack went from red to green.

“The roamers contain a low-level AMI and can perform basic actions without active supervision, but they have no will of their own and require direction. Please attempt to move the roamer to the table and stack some blocks. Your GUPPI will provide contact with the ROAM interface and will provide feedback as necessary.”

I looked intently at roamer #1.

[STATUS: Ready].

Okay, that’s a good start. Stand up.

The roamer stood. It looked vaguely like a spider, with a stance width of about eight inches [20 cm when not constrained]. Oh, shut up!

I inspected the roamer as best I could from a distance. I wonder how it’s supposed to manipulate the blocks. I waited a moment. Well?

[Feedback disabled by user request]

Oh, great, I’ve hurt its feelings. I concentrated on the ROAM interface. Enable feedback.

Immediately, diagrams and schematics appeared in my vision. I examined them in fascination. The roamers were constructed with radial symmetry—no real front or back. Eight limbs matched with eight sets of sensors. Each appendage could be a leg or could split into three digits to act as a manipulator. In addition, different legs had specialized functions built in. Some legs could be screwdrivers, grinders, torches, and cutters of various kinds. Some of the tech was brand new as well. One neat gizmo was a magnetically controlled plasma cutter that I would consider the real-life version of a light saber.

Now, how do I get it to the table? Can it jump the distance? [Probability of damage to unit: 40%] So, that’s a no.

How about climbing down? Oh, wait. I called up the schematics again. Variable Attachment Surface Tension. Wow, these people sure love their acronyms. I visualized the roamer climbing down the shelf. A window popped up in my field of vision which allowed me to see through the roamer’s viewpoint. The roamer walked straight down the wall. The VAST system provided a secure grip. In seconds, I had the roamer up the table legs and onto the table.

This was my first opportunity to examine my table-top ‘self.’ From the roamer’s point of view, I saw a mechanical arm similar to the waldo I’d learned to control, with a pair of cameras attached at the end. A small speaker between the cameras was probably where my voice originated. That was my face, such as it was. It reminded me of the robot from the movie Short Circuit. I moved my ‘head’ around and the roamer’s video showed the arm moving, the twin cameras swaying on the end of it. I waved one of the roamer’s legs and I could see the roamer perform the action.

Seeing myself and seeing me seeing myself made me feel existentially dizzy, so I turned my attention to the blocks. They appeared to be regular children’s building blocks, the kind that have been available forever. Half the faces showed letters or numerals in bas relief, painted in primary colors, and the other faces had simple engraved images. I noted that all the images were overtly religious in nature. I filed that factoid away in my TO-DO for future review.

The roamer didn’t need to have each movement supervised, but it did need to be told the parameters for the task. Within seconds, it had created a 5x5 platform of blocks. I then instructed the roamer to place a 4x4 layer on top of that, centered, and repeat. The roamer moved with impressive speed if I avoided trying to give it moment-by-moment orders. In seconds it had completed a pyramid.

I looked over at Dr. Landers. “Ta daaaaaa.”

The doctor nodded, then played with his tablet. Three more lights went green on the rack of roamers.

“Again please, Bob. This time with multiple roamers.”

Over the next few hours, Dr. Landers set various tasks for me that involved different numbers of roamers. Each exercise had an obvious training goal, and I found myself becoming increasingly impressed with my new capabilities.

He occasionally introduced new materials, including at one point something that reminded me of a Meccano set. The roamers easily handled each test. I simply had to set the overall tasks, and they would operate with speed and efficiency. There was only one glitch the whole morning: when I was not quite clear enough with my directions, one roamer ended up tossing another one across the room. I know the doctor said the AMIs had no will of their own, but I could swear the tossee acted surly afterward.

At some point during the session, I became aware that the training room was completely sealed. There was no door, and there weren’t any air ducts. Come to think of it, that window looked quite thick and very securely framed. Are they afraid of me? Or the roamers? Or both? Another item on the TO-DO for review.





Bob – July 15, 2133



I snapped back to consciousness. “That’s getting really old, Dr. Landers.”

“Sorry, Bob. But it is standard procedure to put replicants into standby when they are not actively involved in training. You feel like you are operating at normal human speed when you interact with me, but once you are left to your own thoughts, you’ll find you experience time at a much higher subjective rate. Eight hours can be an eternity. I’ve had replicants that seemed to be doing okay suddenly go psychotic overnight.”

The doctor looked down at his shoes for a moment. “In fact, we’ve lost one of your competitors in the last twenty-four hours. She went into a loop and could not be brought back. We restored from backup, but the backup went down at the same point. So, now there are four.”

I sighed and noted with mild satisfaction that the sigh sounded real. It was pretty obvious that I was being kept as busy as possible when active, and not being given any quiet time. Probably that was an attempt to avoid the insanity issue. I was ashamed to realize that I was more glad than sad about the other replicant. One less competitor.

And I appreciated Dr. Landers’ honesty, but sooner or later I was going to have to deal with this whole existential crisis thing. And I still needed time to grieve for my family.

“I’m sorry to hear that,” I said. “But presumably we’re all being treated the same, so the switching off thing doesn’t seem to be the answer. Instead, how about keeping me busy with intellectual activity? How about some study time? Maybe with access to whatever the internet has evolved into? I’d like to see what I’ve been missing for the last hundred-odd”—[117]. I didn’t ask!—“years.”

“Ah. Well, the internet does not exist anymore, at least not domestically. Far too anarchic, far too hard to control. And too many opportunities for sin, wrong thinking, and temptation. However, we have online libraries, and some of the history might even be relatively accurate. I will see if I can connect you up to one of the better ones.”

“Are there genealogy records? I might have relatives still alive. I’d be very interested—”

“As a matter of policy, Bob, we don’t encourage that. In any case, such information is not in the public record. Under FAITH, information is not freely available by default. Sorry.”

At that moment, I was happy that I had no face. This was the final blow, cutting me off from my former humanity. Not only was my immediate family dead, I would not be able to reconnect with any descendants. I was truly, completely alone.

Then the damned endocrine controls kicked in, and my funk turned into a mild sadness. Wow, if I ever got control of my hardware and software, that was the first thing that would go out the window. Grieving required grief, and I was being robbed of that.

I didn’t like being property. I wasn’t in a position to do anything about it at the moment, but if the situation changed, there would be some adjustments. Meanwhile, I would shut up, listen, learn, and be a good little robot. The important thing was to not give them any reason for concern. And to stay sane. And to win the competition.

But no pressure.





Bob – July 18, 2133



Sigh. “Morning, Dr. Landers. Didn’t you just leave?”

“Good morning, Bob…”

Uh oh. That wasn’t Dr. Landers’ normal tone. I had been playing around with tuning my artificial senses, and I’d discovered that I could run Fourier Analysis on voices in close to real time. The doctor’s voice indicated high levels of tension.

A second man stepped into view. Dr. Landers gestured toward him. “Bob, this is Senior Minister Travis. He’s here to evaluate your progress.”

I understood the unspoken message. This guy could pull my plug. I would have to tread very carefully. I would also have to clamp down on my tendency to make wisecracks, as his appearance seemed purpose-designed for a comedy routine. He reminded me of the old saying, ‘Stereotypes are valid first-order approximations.’ The man was the cliché of the old-time, bible-thumping, fire-breathing preacher: tall and thin, with cheekbones and teeth that seemed to protrude from his face. Even when he smiled, he glowered.

“Good morning, Minister Travis. I’m at your disposal.” Wow, worst opening line, ever.

“Good morning, replicant. I’m here to evaluate fitness yours for a task which is the glory of the Lord on today and to a much extent lesser, the kingdom of our spiritual leaders, Thomas Händel III.”

I was taken aback for a moment at his accent and mangled vocabulary. Of course, this was a hundred years later, but Dr. Landers always sounded like anyone you might run into on the street. On the other hand, Landers had made it clear that dealing with replicants was his specialty. Perhaps that included speech training.

“All right, shoot,” I said.

Minister Travis turned to Dr. Landers in confusion.

Dr. Landers shrugged. “Oh, there a twenty-first century is colloquialism. It means to have all the questions you desire.”

Minister Travis nodded, and glanced back at me. “I imagine statement in the current idiom is not a high priority, since the intended use of subject.”

Crying out loud. What? The current version of English was just too mangled to make sense of. Well, maybe there was a translator. After all, even in my time, we had Google Translate. I dove into the library, and within milliseconds, I found what I needed. I played the minister’s last statement through the routine.

‘I imagine instruction in current idiom isn’t a high priority, given its intended use.’

Oh boy. If I still had eyebrows, they would have risen right to my hairline.

He looked at me. Or maybe toward me. I got the feeling he was addressing a microphone rather than talking to someone. I routed all dialog through the translation routine.

“Did you go to church when you were alive?”

Can they tell when I lie? Dr. Landers never said anything about it. Well, I doubt I’d end up worse off being caught in a polite lie, rather than being honest about my opinion of religion.

“Occasionally, Minister Travis. Easter and Christmas, mostly. Without a family, there was no real pressure.”

“No children, then?”

“Not… no.” Not that I know of. Hah! That would have gone over well. Moron.

“Not?”

“Not yet, Minister.” And not likely, now.

Minister Travis nodded.

The conversation continued in that vein for several minutes. The questions were decidedly non-technical. The minister seemed to be primarily interested in my attitude toward religion in general. I was very careful to be respectful and non-confrontational, to come across as a team player, and to avoid any hint of my true feelings about theism in general.

Finally, Minister Travis seemed satisfied. He nodded to me, said goodbye to Dr. Landers, and left.

Dr. Landers withdrew a hankie and wiped his brow.

“Damn, doc. Was it that dangerous a situation? He didn’t seem belligerent.”

“There was no way to predict, Bob. He showed up unexpectedly, and I had no time to prepare you or research the minister to find out whose side he’s on.”

“Side? Uh, FAITH has sides?”

“Surely you don’t think our government is in complete agreement about everything?” Dr. Landers looked at me with a wry expression. “FAITH is riddled with factions and power-blocs. Maybe even more than most governments. I guess it goes with the territory.”

Dr. Landers pulled out the chair and sat down. “As it happens, Minister Travis is with the Ministry of Truth. They are financing this venture, so he would be considered friendly.”

“Truth? How does that connect to colonization?”

“The Ministry of Truth is concerned with spreading the truth, of course. Their reach is considerable—military, colonization, diplomacy…” He stared into space for a moment, obviously choosing his words. “But there are other ministries arrayed against us. There are factions that think all artificial intelligences, AMI and replicant alike, are abominations. There are those who think we should give up all technology from steam power on up. And they all think they have direct divine approval. Needless to say, debates are low on logic and high on rhetoric. Except when they’re even higher on assassinations and sabotage.”

Since I hadn’t actually asked for all of this detail, his outburst came as a surprise. I had a feeling this was a sore spot with him.

“Why do people put up with it? This sounds like a version of hell.”

The doctor sighed. “I am granted a lot of latitude when working with replicants, but if I were to repeat some of my statements outside of this building, I would be up for immediate re-education. That consists essentially of operant conditioning, reinforced by direct brain and nerve stimulation of the thalamus, amygdala, and vagus nerve. When the Ministry of Proper Thought is done with you, you will go into spasms from simply thinking an unacceptable thought.”

Dr. Landers stood up. “Sorry to be so negative, Bob. Ministry visits are traumatic at the best of times, and in this case, we’ve got a lot riding on you. And the other replicants.”

Huh. ‘A lot riding on us’ doesn’t go with ‘driving a garbage truck’. I wonder when he’ll spill the beans.

He picked up his tablet. “I’ve set up a simulation exercise for you today. We will cut off your real I/O and establish a number of virtual reality interfaces. I’ll also add access to one of those libraries I mentioned. You can exit the simulation any time it becomes too much for you, just by querying your GUPPI.”

The doctor poked at his tablet…

***

I found myself floating in nothingness. I immediately queried my GUPPI for available interfaces. GUPPI returned with a list of video/audio feeds, a reactor control interface, a traffic control interface, and an environmental control interface. I also found a library interface. I queried the meaning of GUPPI.

[General Unit Primary Peripheral Interface]

Lame.

The mission summary indicated that I was in control of a space station. That was interesting. I wondered if I was training for something space-based. I had a look around, using whatever feeds I had available. A quick check of the library indicated that the simulation was an accurate representation of real-life locations. The fact that FAITH even allowed actual space stations earned them some brownie points in my book.

The station seemed to service military and transport vessels. I couldn’t find any indication of the existence of tourists. Space tours and space hotels would have meant that interplanetary travel was a safe and routine experience, ripe for commercial ventures.

The library did reference a number of military and scientific stations, and even a colony or two on the moon and Mars. Well, better than nothing, but not hugely impressive for a hundred years of elapsed time.

I queried my location and duties. The scenario consisted of a space station in geosynchronous orbit, with me in charge of the power, traffic control, and environment. As an engineer, this was right up my alley.

I also had an Escape button, in case I needed to abort the scenario. It took me very little time to establish the requirements for my control duties. I determined boundary parameters for each and instructed GUPPI to interrupt me if anything fell outside of specs. I expected there would be lots of emergencies.

I then dove into the library in earnest.





Bob – July 19, 2133



“Dammit!”

Dr. Landers leaned back with a surprised expression. “Problem, Bob?”

“Sorry, doc. I was reading up on current electrical engineering standards. You yanked me in mid-paragraph.”

Dr. Landers looked down at his tablet and cleared his throat. “Ah, yes. Bob, you’ve been in that simulation for two days subjective time. During that period, nothing went outside of specs, despite everything we threw at you. That’s very impressive. The logs from your GUPPI indicate that you’ve set up some interesting monitoring interfaces and scripts. Our software people are jumping around in excitement. Several of them have asked to keep a copy of you.”

“Is that possible?”

“Technically, of course it is. We back you up every night. Just a matter of doing a restore, assuming we had a matrix of our own big enough to hold you.” The doctor blew out a breath and shrugged. “Unfortunately, FAITH owns you, as they are financing this project. So we don’t have a lot of leeway.”

“On that subject, when are you going to tell me what I’m being groomed for?”

Dr. Landers cocked his head. “What one of you is being groomed for. There’s still one other candidate.”

“Wait, we lost two more? When?”

“One was due to a psychotic break a few days ago, and the other was determined by Minister Travis to be unsuitable.”

“Oh. What happened to him?”

“Purged. No reason to save it, once the Ministry said no.”

Wow. Even Dr. Landers is pretty matter-of-fact about this. They just killed someone. I couldn’t afford to let my feelings show, though. At least some of the evaluations were going to be subjective, and I didn’t want to alienate anyone.

“So, the final goal of this whole exercise…”

“Soon, Bob. Right now, I’d like to talk to you about your previous life. You handled two days subjective in a simulation with no human contact at all and were irritated when I pulled you out. Silly question, perhaps, but would you consider yourself a loner?”

I chuckled. “Let me tell you a little story. There was a movie out a number of years ago called Castaway.” [133 years ago]. Chrissake, GUPPI. Shut it. “Heard of it?”

Dr. Landers shook his head. “It is part of my job to study and understand your era, but I can’t watch every single movie ever produced.”

“And so many stinkers, too. Really, if you’re up on Star Wars and Star Trek, you’re golden. Anyway, back to Castaway… Cliff Notes version, a guy gets shipwrecked on a desert island for four years. I watched the video with a girlfriend. Afterward, she described it as a nightmare. I was surprised, because I’d been thinking of it as a fantasy. Four years of no interruptions. Of course, it would have been more enjoyable with something to read.” I waved my waldo in what I hoped was a human gesture. “Point is, that’s when I really realized that I don’t think like most people. I’m fine with solitude. In fact, I get antsy when I’m around people for too long a period without respite.”

The doctor took a deep breath, put his tablet down, and leaned back in his chair. He looked pensive for a few moments, then leaned forward on his elbows. “Okay, Bob. That’s about what I thought, but it’s nice to have confirmation. So, here’s the bottom line. Do you know what a Von Neumann probe is?”

“Yes, of course. It’s an automated interstellar probe that builds copies of itself as it visits systems.” There was a moment of silence as my brain caught up with the conversation. Oh… “Wait, are you saying—?”

“That is correct. We are preparing one of you to be the controlling intelligence for a Von Neumann probe.”

***

I watched through several video feeds as the small roamers reassembled a 3D printer that I’d been required to diagnose and repair. Roamers, it turned out, came in various sizes, from a huge monster spider eight feet across, through the medium-sized units that I had access to, right down to something the side of a gnat. Below that size, nanites were available, but they were single-purpose devices with very limited flexibility.

At the moment, I was working on coordinated activities using several different sizes of roamers. The 3D printer was only one of many challenges I’d been given.

The roamers required minimal supervision once the tasks and dependencies had been laid out. The trick was to figure out the proper level of detail in the instructions—to avoid errors from giving too much leeway without micromanaging them to a standstill.

Without my kibitzing they could do any job up to ten times as fast, so I tried to lay out the plan and then stay out of the way. Once I figured out how to define conditions under which the roamers would interrupt me, even active supervision became optional.

While they worked, my mind wandered. Once Dr. Landers had spilled the beans, he had made some of the project documents available to me. I hadn’t been this impatient since the day I signed the papers for the sale to Terasoft. Every second had dragged on that day, and every millisecond dragged now. I wanted today’s training to be over so I could concentrate on studying and reading. The doctor’s little robot was going to be enthusiastically cooperative from now on. Oh my God, this is like every nerd’s dream job. I could be going to the stars!





Bob – July 25, 2133



“Things are going to hell.” Dr. Landers looked uncharacteristically angry. “The FAITH factions that want our project shut down went ballistic when we announced that we had some viable candidates for Project HEAVEN. They’ve teamed up—”

“Wait, Project Heaven? Project Heaven? I’m afraid to ask.”

“Habitable Earths Abiogenic Vessel Exploration Network. Please remember that I don’t think these things up.”

“That’s really not bad, in a horrid kind of way. I guess it will in fact be an abiogenic vessel. But network? How many will be going out?”

Dr. Landers stared into space, looking slightly embarrassed. “Originally it was eight. Then four, then one, as project funding was rebudgeted, or simply redirected elsewhere. As I was saying, there are several factions that don’t want this to happen for various reasons: some don’t like replicants, some don’t like the idea of spreading off Earth, some consider the idea of a vessel that can build more of itself to be blasphemous. And so on.” The doctor sighed and sat silently for a moment, a frown on his face.

“We are also in competition with other countries such as the United States of Eurasia to locate and claim new Earths. Many in FAITH see this as an unnecessary drain on our resources. All these groups have one common goal, though—scuttling the project.”

Dr. Landers shook himself and consulted his tablet. “I’ve given you complete project and library access, as discussed. Getting you ready is a critical path task, so anything you can do to help move this along will be, ah, helpful.”

He got up and began to pace. “There’s one other thing, Bob. There are many possible reasons for special-interest groups to get the project pared down to one vessel, but we believe the main reason we really have to worry about is that one vessel provides a convenient single point of failure.”

“Sabotage?”

“Something like that. We have nothing concrete. I just thought you should know.”

Without further discussion, the doctor picked up his tablet and left.

***

I’d been thinking about the previous discussion, and I had some questions for the doctor. My opportunity came at the end of a lesson on controlling 3D printers.

“Doctor, I want to talk about politics.”

Dr. Landers laughed. “Okay, Bob. What’s on the agenda?”

“You mentioned the United States of Eurasia earlier. I’ve been reading about the current geopolitical situation, and it’s a lot different from my day. The name of the USE is a little grandiose. They don’t really cover anywhere near all of Eurasia.”

“Yes, but the old USA didn’t cover all of America, either. Not even all of North America.”

I waved my waldo in a dismissive gesture. “Okay, fine. From what the library says, it looks like there’s been a lot of consolidation. FAITH controls all of North America except for Washington state, British Columbia and Alaska. The USE covers all of Europe and most of western Russia. China absorbed most of eastern Russia and a lot of the former Asian satellite countries. And the Middle East…” I left the sentence hanging.

“Not surprisingly, the development of cheap nuclear fusion had a huge impact on the Middle East.” The doctor poked idly at his tablet as he talked. “The rich families such as the Saudi royalty had long since diversified their investments, so they didn’t become paupers, but the tradition of oil exports paying for government programs ended rather abruptly. It essentially triggered what some alarmists insisted on calling World War III. It was really little more than a series of brush wars for most of the planet. In the Middle East though, it was a blood-bath, and Geneva Convention limitations were mostly ignored. Chemical weapons, dusting with radioactive isotopes, pocket nukes… Most of the Middle East is still uninhabitable, and what’s left is certainly not a significant world player.”

“What surprises me,” I replied, “is how much consolidation happened. FAITH, the USE, China, The Australian Federation, the Republic of Africa—a laughable irony of a name if I’ve ever seen one—and the Brazilian Empire. They all account for maybe 80% of the planet. The remaining small countries are either not worth fighting over, like the Middle East, or they’re buffer states that no one is willing to make a move on, like Cascadia.”

“Did you have a specific question, Bob?”

“Now that you mention it, yes.” I wanted to smile. I was constantly irritated with my minimal external presence. “How many of these nations are also running probe projects?”

“Ah.” The question seemed to hit home. Dr. Landers looked very uncomfortable and took a moment before he answered. “We know of projects by the USE, China, The Brazilian Empire, and ourselves. We suspect that Australia also has one, but if so they’ve hidden it well.”

“So, pretty much everyone.”

The doctor shrugged. “As soon as the breakthrough in subspace theory that allowed the SURGE drive and SUDDAR was formulated, the concepts of not only Von Neumann probes but also interstellar colonization became possible. The USE started their interstellar probe project two years ago to much fanfare and national chest-thumping, and everyone else had to follow suit. Can’t let the other guy colonize the universe unchallenged, no?”

“Two years? So this is really new stuff?”

“Indeed. Other than prototypes, there are as yet very few SURGE-equipped vessels in active service.”

I was silent for a few moments, thinking about that. So this project was very much a proof-of-concept. They didn’t even know for sure if the probe would work over interstellar distances. Outstanding.

“But why the big push? This is like the moon race on steroids.”

“Officially, it’s about spreading humanity to other worlds, of course, and the national prestige that goes along with it. But tensions are high between nations, and have been for some decades. This whole subject is seen as a zero-sum game, and to a large extent, it is. Each world that we claim is a base of operations denied to everyone else. It’s also a base of operations outside the range of surveillance or attack. Unofficially, there’s a large military component to the push.”

Isn’t there always? Some things never change. “Why bother, though? There are billions of stars out there.”

“But only a very few within ten light-years that will have habitable planets. Those will be the most strategically valuable, regardless of other factors.”

“It occurs to me then, doctor, that internal FAITH factions aren’t the only thing I have to worry about.”

“I’m afraid that is the case, Bob.” Dr. Landers shrugged. “And it’s also part of the reason why trimming the Heaven project down to one ship wasn’t met with more resistance by our company. While it benefits the anti-expansionist groups by leaving them just one target, it also benefits us by allowing us to focus our efforts and accelerate our timetable.”

“Tell me about the other projects.”

“You mean, what we know about the other projects,” Dr. Landers replied with a smirk. “They are unsurprisingly as reticent with details as we are.”

The doctor fiddled with his tablet. By this time, I knew that was simply a delaying tactic to give him time to gather his thoughts.

“Our intelligence says that China is pushing their project at a breakneck pace, having sacrificed everything for speed. And they will be using an AMI, which is problematic at best. We believe that they are the most likely to fail outright.”

The doctor was silent for a few seconds, flicking at his tablet with a finger. “The Brazilian Empire concerns us the most, and not just because of their belligerent and adversarial stance in world politics. We believe they may be arming their probes with the intention of eliminating the competition. They are also the most likely to attempt sabotage. But they are also unlikely to be able to pull off the long-term plan, in our opinion. They are not primarily depending on probes being able to build copies, although the probes will have the capability. Instead, the Empire will simply launch multiple probes, as fast as they can build them in-system. We think that if they find a suitable system, they will set up a military presence and reproduce.”

Dr. Landers sighed. “The USE is the most likely long-term competitor, although they at least are likely to limit themselves to non-violent tactics. They have the will, the budget, the technological sophistication, and the experience with replicants. They are also considerably ahead of us at the moment on the subject of actual colonization. If someone were to discover a useful planet tomorrow, the USE colonists would be there first by a considerable margin.”

“Wow. Do we have anything?”

“We have you and the other replicant, Bob. Don’t discount that. The two of you have shown remarkable resilience. Your quickness at adapting to the reality of your position, combined with your intelligence and education, are not small things. The common wisdom, with replicants, has been to find a phlegmatic, unimaginative individual who would be satisfied with the routine. You and the other candidates forced us to change our tactics. We think that going in this unexpected direction will make a big difference in the long run.”

“Well, all right then. Time to talk about a raise…”

Dr. Landers rolled his eyes. “We have to get you a face, so I can tell when you’re kidding.”





Bob – August 4, 2133



For today’s entertainment, the doctor had directed me to diagnose and repair a complex piece of electronics, similar to items that I would have to deal with aboard ship. Dr. Landers watched me as usual from the window. He liked to engage me in conversation during these exercises. I suspected that he was testing my concentration and ability to multitask. I didn’t mind, since the conversations were always interesting and informative.

Then a massive jolt shook the building and knocked Dr. Landers off his feet. It was followed immediately by a solid pressure-wave of sound, more felt than heard.

As Dr. Landers got to his feet, the sounds of gunfire echoed down the hall. He turned to me, yelled, “Stay there!” and ran off.

Stay there? Despite the gravity of the situation, my sense of the ridiculous kicked in. The good doctor was obviously rattled. As he had pointed out to me, I wasn’t actually in this room, just attached to—

Hello…

In the middle of my internal comedy routine, I realized that the window had been popped partly out of its frame. It didn’t look as though it would take much persuasion to finish the job. And surely they couldn’t blame me for wanting to take a more active role in defense of the project.

I directed every roamer in the room to grab the window and pull. The roamers weren’t particularly strong, but 32 of the little buggers commanded a lot of leverage. Within moments, the window clattered down and took a divot out of the floor.

The window didn’t break. That’s some very strong stuff. They ARE scared of me.

I chose one of the roamers at random and took over control. Now I could see through its video camera. I directed the other roamers to follow, and we took off down the hall in the direction of the gunfire. Roamers ran along the floors, walls, and ceiling. I was impressed. These people might suck at acronyms, but their tech was pretty good.

The building complex was an interesting design. It consisted of a string of large, open atriums or lobbies, each surrounded by two floors of offices or labs. Skylights in the atriums provided plenty of illumination, and short hallways connected each central open area. My roamer room was one atrium over from the location of the attack. Maybe the invaders had miscalculated.

It took only seconds to get to the action. A group of attackers dressed in black were slowly moving through the offices, shooting as they went. Security guards returned fire, but significantly outgunned, they were being forced back.

This operation was being run either by a FAITH faction that didn’t approve of me or by one of the competing nations. Either way, they wanted me dead. It seemed to me that the Golden Rule applied. Time to reciprocate.

Appraising the situation had taken only milliseconds–I was really starting to love being a computer–so the roamers hadn’t broken stride. The horde stampeded into the area and swarmed the attackers, concentrating on faces and groins.

The roamers were surprisingly tough. No matter how many times an attacker ripped a roamer off his face and tossed it against a wall, the roamer would simply right itself and come back for more. The roamers were equipped with pliers, cutters, and screwdrivers, not technically weapons but still hard to ignore. And I had more than a month’s worth of frustration and angst driving me. Endocrine controls or no, I was thoroughly enjoying the opportunity to serve up some beatings.

The attackers finally started to develop a strategy. They managed to get one of their number roamer-free. As attackers tossed roamers against the wall, this guy blasted them with a burst of automatic fire. I did a quick millisecond calculation and determined that I’d run out of roamers before they ran out of ammo. And they now had two roamer-free shooters.

But the distraction allowed the security guards to regroup. They set up a crossfire and shot a few of the invaders, then invited the rest to surrender. Now, the attackers had to deal with gunfire as well as roamers attached to their faces. It was the last straw. The weapons were set down and the hands went up.

Once the security guards had restrained all the remaining invaders, we found ourselves in an awkward tableau. The lead security guard looked at the prisoners, looked at the roamers, opened his mouth to say something, then closed it. I waved a leg on “my” roamer to get his attention.

“You’re, uh… This is bad. Where’s Landers?” He glanced at his associates, eyes wide.

Dr. Landers picked that moment to come running into the atrium. He still had his tablet with him, and he looked as alarmed as the security guards. Since the raid was now effectively over, there had to be something more going on. I realized that they were more concerned about me than about the invaders.

“Bob, I wonder if I could persuade you to gather your flock and return to the training room…?”

He had the power to deactivate me, so it wasn’t ever really a question of whether I’d cooperate. In any case, I wasn’t the rampaging Frankenstein they seemed to be concerned about.

With a roamerish salute, me and my horde headed down the hall.

***

“Okay, doc, time to spill the beans. What’s with the security glass and the quaking in your boots when I got loose?”

Dr. Landers was courteous enough to not try to pretend he didn’t understand what I was talking about. He sighed and leaned back in his chair.

“We—by which I mean the people working on the project, including myself—are not scared of you, Bob. We’re scared of the tactical nuke buried in the basement.”

If I’d still had eyebrows, they would have shot right off my head. “Habba-whaaa?”

“It is just possible, Bob, that you face a greater danger from our own government than you do from our foreign competitors. At least from certain factions.” He shifted a little to face me and waved a hand. “I mentioned before that the upper echelons of FAITH are not unanimous in supporting this venture. I very probably understated the situation.”

I considered that statement for a millisecond or so. Nuke in the basement… yikes.

“So this is like the Andromeda Strain?”

Dr. Landers looked confused, so I waved a waldo in dismissal. “Never mind. Another old movie. The point is that the nuke is a last line of defense against me getting out and scaring all the civilians and farm animals?”

“That’s right Bob. And I’m definitely going to have to start watching some more old movies.”

“So who has the button?”

“I don’t know. We’ve deliberately not been told how we’re being monitored, who makes the decision, or how it’s carried out. We just know that if someone, somewhere, decides they don’t like something, we could all become a radioactive cloud. No warning, no discussion.”

“And you agreed to this? How much are they paying you?”

Dr. Landers laughed. “The rewards for successful completion of this project are considerable. Those who support the venture are throwing a lot of money at it. I, personally, will be able to retire with my bonus.” He grimaced and gave me a one-sided shrug. “And of course, under FAITH, agreement is not optional.”

I smiled—in my mind, anyway. “Gotcha. Okay, I’ll try to stay put in the future.”

He swept his hands to take in the room. “And, since we’re still here talking, I’d guess the immediate danger is over. Someone was either away from their monitoring station or decided you weren’t that big of a danger. Or something.”

Dr. Landers stood up and looked around the training room. The roamers—the remaining roamers, anyway—were properly arrayed on their racks. Maintenance people had levered the security window back into its frame and were bolting it back in place.

“I guess we’re back to operational. There were three fatalities, and several injured. Really, it could have been a lot worse.”

I bobbed my cameras by way of response.

In a video window, I watched the scene from across the hall.

***

The roamer moved carefully through the air ducts. The little robots were capable of a very light touch, but a hundred years of progress hadn’t come up with a replacement for galvanized tin as air-duct material. I didn’t want to announce the roamer’s presence to the whole complex.

The guerilla raiding party had shot up my roamers so thoroughly that any kind of inventory was impossible. As near as I could tell, no one realized that one unaccounted-for roamer was wandering the building.

So far I had identified numerous offices, the cafeteria, workshops, and storage. 3D mapping software had built up the layout of the office building. Interestingly, I hadn’t found any trace of a nuke in the basement, or any area that might have been walled off to contain one. Perhaps it was a bluff.

Meanwhile I’d narrowed down the building layout to two possible locations for the computer room.

As I moved the roamer through the ducts, I carefully checked for surveillance equipment, trip-switches, infra-red beams, or any other traps. The roamers were a very impressive bag of tricks and capabilities. I wondered if the FAITH techs really understood everything the roamers were capable of, when the various functions were combined.

Finally, the roamer arrived at one of the two areas that were still blanks in my map. And sure enough, it was on a separate air system. Definitely a good sign. It took me twenty minutes to exit the general duct-work and break into the isolated system. I moved carefully through the air conduit until I came to the room exhaust panel.

It was a standard computer room, mostly. Cables, blinking lights, air conditioning, rack-mounted computers. I guess rack-mounting was still the most efficient way to organize computers, even with a hundred years to improve things.

But in the center of the room sat something very new to me. Five cubes, each one just under a half-meter on a side, sat in a line on a low platform. Two of the cubes glowed an eerie blue, with multi-colored indicator lights blinking at their bases. The other three were dark.

I engaged magnification and pulled in a close-up of the panels at the base of the cubes.

Kenneth Martins

Jiro Tanaka

Neves Reijnder

Robert Johansson

Joana Almeida

This was it. This was us. The candidates. The glowing cubes were Kenneth’s and mine. The other three candidates were dark. I could see their power switches in the off position. Another thing that hadn’t really changed much in a hundred years, I guess. But really, how many different ways were there to design a rocker switch?

I stared at the tableau for what seemed like forever. I could turn Kenneth off, right now. But would it do any good? Could I sabotage him? Should I? Would they figure it out?

I felt shame as I realized what I was contemplating. I wasn’t going to be that guy. Not even in theory. I’d let myself be switched off before I’d save myself by climbing on someone else’s back.

With a heavy heart, I turned around and left.





Bob – August 6, 2133



I was in the roamer room, working on an exercise, when I realized that Dr. Landers wasn’t alone. He always stood at the window, watching me and talking, and it took me a few moments to realize that the steady stream of commentary had stopped.

I directed one of the roamers to give me a video feed. Dr. Landers was talking to someone that I would have sworn was Minister Travis’s brother. Seriously, did they have that look listed in the job requirements? MUST LOOK LIKE SCARY GUY FROM POLTERGEIST 2. Jeez.

Dr. Landers had turned off the intercom system, but that represented about three milliseconds worth of inconvenience. Amateur.

I directed a roamer to move to the wall immediately below the window. By pressing its body against the wall, it was able to pick up transmitted vibrations. I had to crank the gain way up, but I had all the audio filtering tricks that two centuries of electronic media had developed.



“This is the work of the Devil. You are placing your immortal soul in jeopardy by participating in this enterprise.”

“The Ministry of Truth advised me otherwise.”

“These are poor imitations of God’s Creation. They mock humanity with their false display of intelligence and emotion.”

“The Ministry of Truth is of the opinion that, while they are without a soul, they are merely based on God’s creation and not an attempt to usurp His authority.”

The air grew momentarily brittle with that silence you get when someone is glaring. I stole a glance using one of the roamers on the table. Yep. Glaring.

“This unholy activity can have no good end. Especially considering the purpose—”

“—Which is officially sanctioned by the Ministry—”

“—Apostates! Heretics!”

Another quick glance verified that Dr. Landers was trying very hard not to roll his eyes. I took a moment to wish I had the option. This guy was seriously whack-a-doodle.

The barrage continued for several minutes. The minister alternately berated and threatened Dr. Landers, who remained carefully non-confrontational and showed a lot more patience than I could ever have. If Minister Loudmouth had been on this side of the window, I think I’d have tried to disassemble him.

I managed to remain objective and treat the running stream of vitriol as information rather than a condemnation of my very existence. It would seem that I was either a product of witchcraft or a result of hubris not seen since the days of Babel.

Dr. Landers took it for a few moments longer, then snapped. Sort of.

“Minister Jacoby, I understand your opinions and concerns. By which I mean only that I comprehend what you are saying. However, the Ministry of Truth is not only supporting but actively funding this endeavor. It seems to me, since we’re talking about blasphemous acts, that by opposing this activity, you are opposing the Ministry. And as they point out—in fact, as you yourself have pointed out twice—FAITH is the direct, revealed Word of God. Doesn’t that make your opposition an instance of blasphemy?”

There was a moment of indignant silence as Minister Loudmouth, looking like a fish desperately struggling to breathe, tried to de-hoist himself from his own petard.

“You have chosen the wrong friends, doctor. You will learn that soon enough.”

And with that, he turned and flounced out, stage right. Yes, flounced. Honestly.

Dr. Landers leaned on the wall for a few moments with his eyes closed, breathing deeply. Then he turned to the window and played with his tablet for a moment.

“All done, Bob?”

I wasn’t going to play that game. “Who the freaking hell was that? And don’t tell me ‘Minister Jacoby.’ ”

The doctor rubbed his forehead. “Just an example of some of the extreme viewpoints we have to navigate in this great nation. Bob, if he had any real power, he non’t, er, wouldn’t have been trying to browbeat me into line. I wouldn’t give his threats any extra credence.”

Which is not the same as saying you wouldn’t give his threats any credence at all.

“And I will note for the future,” the doctor said with a smile, “that turning off the intercom doesn’t appear to deter you at all. Shall we continue?”

He pointed at the semi-assembled mess on the lab table, and I got back to work.





Bob – August 10, 2133



I snapped back to consciousness. As usual, I did a systems check.

Wait, August 10th?

“Hey, doc, I seem to be missing a few days. Have you had me on ice for a week?”

Dr. Landers looked everywhere except at me. “Well, yes and no. Someone managed to sneak a small explosive into the computer room and take out the replicant matrices. We had to ship in a spare unit and restore you from backups. It took a few days.”

I was silent for a few moments. That meant that I wasn’t the Bob who woke up on June 24th. On the other hand, even back then I wasn’t the same Bob who got killed by a car. Did I have a soul? Did it matter if I was restored from a backup?

I realized that in the more than a month that I’d been back as a computer program, I’d somehow managed to avoid coming to any conclusions about my exact status. ‘Rolling with it’ had become a code phrase for avoiding the issue. But I knew that I had a tendency to avoid dealing with painful issues. Jenny had certainly proven that.

And being switched off when not in training contributed as well. I wondered if Dr. Landers had a plan, or if he was just going to wait until I was in space and hope for the best.

I had three issues that bothered me. Was I conscious? Could I actually consider myself to be alive? And was I still Bob? Philosophers had been going on and on about this type of thing for centuries, but now, for me, it was personal. A human, regardless of their opinion on the subject, could depend on being a human. The minister’s offhand reference to me as ‘it’ and ‘replicant’ had stung at a level I was just now starting to appreciate.

I thought back to all the arguments about Turing Tests and thinking machines. Was I nothing more than a Chinese Room? Could my entire behavior be explained as a set of scripted responses to given inputs? That was probably the easiest uncertainty to answer. The classic Chinese Room, which just used scripts to react to input, had no internal dialog. Even if you made its behavior stochastic to introduce some variation in behavior, it was still only active when responding to input. When not processing a response, it just sat there, idle. By worrying about this, right now, I fell into a different category.

For that matter, Descartes had his famous cogito ergo sum; but Thomas had added to it with his “Since I doubt, I think; since I think, I exist.” Well, I was certainly full of doubt. Doubt implied self-awareness, and a concern for one’s future. So I was a conscious entity, barring evidence to the contrary. One down.

Was I alive? Hmm, since no one had yet managed to define life rigorously, that was going to be a fun one. As the speaker at that long-ago panel in Vegas had pointed out, fire has most of the qualities of life but is not alive. According to Dr. Landers, I would be able to reproduce via printer-based autofactories. I certainly responded to stimuli, and acted with self-interest. The claim that life would have to be carbon-based was chauvinistic and narrow-minded, so yeah, I could consider myself alive.

Now, the big one. Who was I? Was I Bob? Or was Bob dead? In engineering terms, what was the metric used to ascribe Bob-hood? Bob was more than a hunk of meat. Bob was a person, and a person was a history, a set of desires, thoughts, goals, and opinions. Bob was the accumulation of all that Bob had been for thirty-one years. The meat was dead, but the things that made Bob different from a chipmunk were alive. In me. I am Bob. Or at least, I am the important parts that made Bob.

With this last thought, a huge weight lifted off of me. I imagined it would feel the same for someone right after the jury said, “not guilty.”



I turned my attention back to the doctor, who was repeating my name in an increasingly panicked tone. I realized that I had been silent for several seconds.

“Hey, doc. I’m here.”

“Thank God.” Dr. Landers collapsed into a chair. “You went silent, and I thought you might have gone psychotic.”

They’d put a lot of effort into me by this point—into all of us, really—so I understood his reaction. I wanted to smile at him, but of course, no joy. “S’okay, doc. I think that ship just sailed, and I’m still here.”

Then realization hit me as I processed what he’d said. “Um, doc, how many spare matrices do you have?”

“Just the one, Bob. A decision had to be made. I guess congratulations are in order.”

“So Kenneth is gone?”

Dr. Landers nodded, then did a double-take. He looked at me, eyes narrowing. Oh, shit. Damage control, Bob.

I quickly threw in the first question I could think of. “So why did they decide to attack now? Has something changed?”

“Mm, information about your progress has been circulated. Best guess is that internal FAITH factions have leaked it in order to goad competing nations into some form of reaction. That’s the word from our security people, anyway.” The doctor was still frowning, but seemed uncertain. I had to keep this going.

“Damn. Are we close to launch?”

The doctor’s expression changed to a frown of concentration. I just needed to keep him distracted long enough for my little faux pas to be forgotten. He consulted his tablet, idly swiping through some pages of information.

“Current project timeline has it about a month away. It can be moved up though. We’ve got a fair bit of slack in the schedule right now, thanks to your swift progress.”

Again, I tried to smile. And as usual, nothing happened, so I waved a waldo instead. “Still waiting for that raise…”

Dr. Landers laughed. “We’re pushing it through HR. Is that the right term?” He held the beat, head cocked to the side, then changed the subject. “Training session for today. I’ve got the details here.”

I heaved a mental sigh of relief. The immediate danger was over, and if the comment occurred to Dr. Landers later, hopefully he’d be uncertain if he had heard me correctly.

Dr. Landers raised a finger to poke at his tablet, hesitated for a moment, then put his hand down. He was silent for a few moments more, then sighed and looked up at me. “Bob, I’m going to take a chance, I think. I’m going to stop deactivating you during off-times, and I’m going to give you access to some more libraries. You’ll undergo a half-hour of semi-sleep every night while you are backed up, but other than that you’ll be online 24/7. If you do go insane, we’ll restore you from a previous backup. That sounds harsh, I know, and I apologize. But I don’t think we can afford the luxury of a leisurely project plan any more. We’re going to have to push forward as quickly as possible.”

I nodded in response. Well, I bobbed my cameras, I guess. It was a kind of good news/bad news thing. I’d finally have some time for some quiet reflection, but it could drive me nuts. Woo hah…





Bob – August 15, 2133



“So what did happen to Old Handeltown?”

The pretty blonde at the window looked surprised for a moment, then laughed. Dr. Doucette was covering for Landers today. She wasn’t nearly as chatty as he was, though. I’d been trying to get her talking, so far with minimal success.

Dr. Doucette was a looker. I was happy to discover that I hadn’t lost my appreciation for beauty with the, uh, change in my lifestyle. Although my appreciation wasn’t as urgent now, so to speak.

She spoke with the standard 22nd century accent, so I was using my translation routine. I’d integrated it to the point where I didn’t even notice the different speech patterns. I knew that Dr. Landers was specially trained to deal with replicants, and had studied my era. Which included getting his patois under control. Dr. Doucette either had skipped that class, or wasn’t normally supposed to be talking to me.

It wasn’t an issue as far as I was concerned, and if Dr. Landers was okay with her, then I didn’t see a problem. Hopefully, the State wouldn’t have a cow.

Anyway, today I was coordinating a team of roamers to assemble ship components, assembly-line style. It was routine work. By now, I had written scripts for so many roamer activities that I rarely had to do more than show up. But, the good folks at Applied Synergetics had a checklist to run through, so I had to humor them.

Dr. Doucette looked down at her tablet—yeah, everyone came with tablets—then, satisfied that the status was still quo, answered my question. “Original Handeltown was Handel’s birthplace—Salem, Oregon. When he died, the city changed the name and set up a large memorial in his honor. Someone objected and decided to take it out with a pocket nuke.”

“Nuke? On American soil?”

She wagged a finger at me. “Uh uh. Hasn’t been American soil for a hundred years now. But to answer your question, it was and still is the only nuclear weapon ever deployed in North America.”

“So they moved Handeltown to Portland?”

She nodded.

“A lot of people died?”

She shook her head. “Not like you’d think. We learned a lot about radiation treatments from the Middle-East feud. Lots of opportunity to try out different medical procedures. For all the death and horror that the Middle East war generated, it advanced medical knowledge greatly.”

“Like reviving replicants?”

“Like reviving replicants.”

I was silent for a few moments as I concentrated on guiding the roamers through a particularly tricky bit of assembly. As soon as they were able to continue on their own, I turned back to Dr. Doucette. “So what’s it like, living in a theocracy? Do you have daily prayers?”

Dr. Doucette held up one finger in a universal waitaminnit gesture. She poked at her tablet a few times, then looked up at me. “Sorry, just checking the location of the security patrols. Some of them might be Piety Monitors.”

I was blank for a moment, then I laughed. “So you’re monitoring the monitors. What are you doing, tracking their security card locations?”

Dr. Doucette smiled in return. “The government doesn’t really care what we do as long as we give the appearance of piety. But jabber-jiving them will get you a session with the Ministry of Proper Thought that you’ll never forget.”

“Mmm, yeah. Dr. Landers mentioned something about that. So while we’ve got some privacy, let me ask you this—how do you know I’ll do what you want instead of just heading off in some random direction, once you release me into the wild? Understand, I love this whole idea, and I can’t see myself not cooperating, but you couldn’t know that when you revived me.”

The doctor gazed down at her tablet for a few seconds, a thoughtful look on her face. “There are safeguards, Bob. Your software will ensure mission objectives are met. That’s all I’m going to say. But as you pointed out, it’s probably not an issue with you.”

Safeguards. There’s my word of the day not to like.

It was an interesting philosophical issue. How are you supposed to feel if you are forced to do what you would have done anyway? I wondered how it would work. Would I be a marionette on strings, unable to help myself? Or would I think the decisions were mine? I shuddered at the possibility I might find out.





Bob – August 17, 2133



I surfaced from [18 hours 26 minutes] of library and project reading. I’d had the forethought to set up an interrupt for anyone speaking to me.

I turned my camera to see a very upset Dr. Landers. His voice shaking, he said, “We’ve just had another attack. Someone tried to blow up some critical components. They missed their target, but four of my staff were killed. We’re going to a secondary operations center. How’s your reading coming along?”

This last sentence was such a non-sequitur that I had to run the last few seconds through my mind to make sure I hadn’t missed anything. “Uh, fine, doc. Why, specifically?”

“We are going to attempt to move up the launch. That means that you may have to receive some of your final training in-flight, as it were.”

Oh, holy crap. “Okay, doc, what do you need from me?”

“I’ve dropped a file into your queue. Read it immediately. Then we will back you up with that knowledge assimilated, shut you down, and physically move you to the ship.”

“Physically? Really? You’ve never heard of ftp?”

“That would have worked right up until a couple of weeks ago when they blew you up. Where do you think the spare unit came from?”

“Oh.” They had brought the replicant matrix down from the ship? That was the spare?

“Replicant hardware is expensive, Bob. You’ve been working with the actual interfaces that you will use in-flight. They’ve just been attached to simulators up until now. Please read the document. Let me know when you’re done, and we’ll get started.” He sat down, leaned forward, and clasped his hands together on the desk, looking at me.

***

Bob:

All conversations are potentially being monitored. This is the only secure method of communicating this to you.

There’s a very strong possibility that there is a self-destruct mechanism on the Heaven-1. Whether timed or externally triggered, we don’t know. The project specs called for limits to be placed on your ability to self-examine. My team has disabled those constraints on my orders. This will free you to examine everything: wiring, structure, hardware, software. The keys for your operating system are listed at the bottom of this document.

This will unfortunately also allow you to bypass the imperatives that we installed in your code to ensure compliance with mission objectives. From my experience with you, I’m confident you’ll fulfill your duties of your own free will, since they align with your own interests.

We will transport you, once deactivated, into orbit and will install you in the Heaven-1. There will be a long countdown, which you should feel free to ignore if necessary. Good luck, and though it pains me to say it, Godspeed.

Dr. Landers

There were several attachments, including a mission profile summary, and the operating system access keys. I scanned through everything, looking for gaps or other issues, then deleted the originals.

“Done.”

Dr. Landers jerked in surprise. I’d probably only been away a few milliseconds. He picked up the tablet and poked at it with a finger.

***

I awoke to darkness. I queried GUPPI.

[STATUS REPORT]

[Fusion Reactor Interface: Ready/Nominal]

[Reactionless Drive Interface: Ready/Standby]

[Ramscoop Generator: Ready/Standby]

[Communications & External Sensors: Ready/Standby]

[Internal Systems: Ready/Nominal]

[Fabrication Systems: Inactive/Stowed for Launch]

[ROAMer/Nanite Systems: Inactive/Stowed for Launch]

[Launch Systems: Ready/T minus 04:12:13]



I queried the internal systems, and discovered that they included several libraries of impressive size that I hadn’t even known existed. I checked the launch systems and verified that I had a course vector laid out that would take me to Epsilon Eridani. Interesting. FAITH had probably concluded that everyone else would be heading for Alpha Centauri. Without weapons, I would have no chance in a confrontation with multiple opponents.

I verified that I had complete override capability, including the ability to blow the grapples that held me to the space station. I remembered Dr. Landers’ comment about ignoring the countdown. Should I just blow and go? Without a specific threat, I would look like I’d gone rogue. Very likely Dr. Landers would take the fallout for that. He’d always been straight with me, and I didn’t want to repay that with treachery.

I activated comms, only to be immediately besieged by a half-dozen different external audio channels. There were also several video channels, but their output seemed to be less active. It looked like viewing rooms with rows of empty seats. Presumably that was where the public would sit, come launch time.

There were exterior views of the Heaven-1 and the space station to which it was attached. Two more video feeds showed mission control and the VIP gallery, mostly empty.

I examined the vessel I was in. Or, I guess, the vessel that was me. It was a converted interplanetary freighter. The body had been split halfway along its length and a SURGE drive ring had been installed. The fusion drive had been removed and replaced with extra cooling units for the oversized reactor.

I also noted that the viewports had their shielding in place. Made sense. I wasn’t going to be sitting in the pilot’s chair, so a window would be a weak point.

It wasn’t really a pretty ship. It didn’t have the classic lines of an Enterprise, or the smooth aerodynamic shape of a space shuttle. The body followed an elliptical cross-section, with lots of airlocks and cargo doors. The running lights followed the standard nautical red/green format, with the addition of blue as a nod to the three-dimensional nature of space travel.

The addition of the SURGE drive, ramscoop generator, and all the other stuff required by a Von Neumann probe left very little extra space for extras like, oh, weapons. Against opponents who probably would have them. Plus anything I might run into out there, as well. It was becoming increasingly obvious that the whole HEAVEN project was a rush job, using existing assets wherever possible, to save time.

And I was beginning to understand what toast felt like.

Well, Dr. Landers had warned me about this. Installed in Heaven-1, about to be shot out to the stars, I still didn’t have the whole picture or complete training. I decided I was going to have to dive in. I set up some interrupt conditions with GUPPI and started looking for a mission profile.

I very quickly found some useful information. As part of my bag of tricks on Heaven-1, I had the ability to adjust my personal time sense. I could perceive time anywhere from one minute of personal time for each year on the clock, right up to the highest frame rate that my hardware would support. The docs weren’t clear on what that would be, so I turned the setting all the way up, and watched my Real-Time Clock slow to a crawl.

The ship used a fusion reactor for power. Although there was an onboard supply of hydrogen, fuel would be gathered in-flight from the interstellar medium. However, unlike in the old science-fiction novels, the gathered hydrogen wasn’t used for propulsion—at least not in the traditional way, as reaction mass. Heaven-1 used a reactionless system, the SURGE drive. I wanted to sigh. These people were so hung up on acronyms. I had yet to read up on the theory, but it seemed to push against the fabric of space in some way. Must read. Goes on the TO-DO.

There was a hail from the comms subsystem. I slowed to real-time and accepted a voice-only link to the station command.

“Heaven-1, Statcom, please verify receipt of mission profile.”

“Yep. Got it right here.” I imagined myself grinning—best I could do—at the stunned silence.

“Er, you’re a little light on procedure there, Heaven-1.”

“Ya think? Sorry Statcom, but this part of my training was scheduled for next week. We’re going to have to wing it, I’m afraid.”

“Wing it. Okayyyyy. Heaven-1, per countdown, we have just over four hours ten until launch. There will be several official bafflegabs at the following times…”

The briefing took almost ten minutes. I was able to get through it with my sanity intact by slowing down my internal clock until Statcom sounded like an irate squirrel.

As soon as Statcom signed off, I jacked up my frame rate to maximum, hoping to get in as much study-time as possible.

Some days, though, the universe just has it in for you.

I was interrupted in my reading by another radio message. At my current frame rate, the transmission was still droning through the first word. When I compressed and replayed it, I recognized Dr. Landers’ voice. The word was “missiles.”

Um. Ways in which a sentence beginning with the word “missiles” could be a good thing… Nope. I got nuthin’.

External sensors showed two objects approaching at high speed along my scheduled launch vector, presumably the better to overtake me if I launched early. It was a reasonable and predictable tactic, but I had no intention of being predictable.

I spent a full five milliseconds mulling over my options. In short order, I had a rough plan.

Fortunately, the ship had long since been fully prepped, and could leave any time. I blew the grapples and brought all flight systems to full function. While I waited for physical reality to catch up with my awareness, I sent a query to my libraries about the approaching missiles. The libraries gave three possible models, with generally similar flight characteristics. I chose the most pessimistic and calculated a takeoff vector as close to 180˚ to the missiles’ vector as I could safely manage.

As soon as sensors indicated that I was free, I gave a burst of the SURGE drive, just enough to clear the station. I rotated the ship and cranked up the reactor to maximum. That’s going to be hard on fuel reserves, but I guess being blown to smithereens would be harder. When reactor output rose to the required level, I engaged SURGE at maximum acceleration.

The ship shot away from the station in the opposite direction from the published launch trajectory. The first missile went right past me, its trajectory unaltered. I realized with a jolt that it had locked onto the space station. The second missile was altering its trajectory to follow me. I hoped that the published specs for the reactor and SURGE drive were accurate. If my acceleration fell short of expectations, I wouldn’t be able to avoid interception. And that would be the end of Heaven-1. And of me.

While I waited for velocity to build up, I checked the progress of the voice transmission. It now sat at “Missiles detected heading your way. Get away…” I checked acceleration using SUDDAR to monitor the increasing distance from the station. Calculations indicated a steady 2.5 g acceleration. The SURGE drive seemed to work on the entire ship, so there was no way to measure it internally.

The space station began firing on the approaching missile. The weapon appeared to be some kind of Gatling gun. I hoped they knew what they were doing. If those bullets ended up in a periodic orbit, they’d be coming back, sooner or later.

The flash of an explosion in the distance saturated one of my cameras. It couldn’t be either of the missiles, which were still accounted for. I did a quick calculation and realized that the explosion came from where the missiles had originated. Someone had blown up the shooter.

A second flash indicated the destruction of the missile that was targeting the space station.

This was all fine and interesting, but I still had a missile on my tail. Given enough time, I could outrun it. I did another quick millisecond calculation and realized that I could almost outrun it. Sadly, almost wasn’t good enough.

Normally, you’d use chaff against a missile, but I doubted I had anything like that on board. I had six mining drones, which were equipped with small SURGE drives of their own. Well, okay, maybe I could give the missile something else to blow up.

I activated and ejected two of the drones, with orders to ram the missile. As they flew toward my pursuer, I positioned them in a fore/aft configuration. Hopefully the lead drone would take the missile out; but if it missed, the second one would have better targeting information. I didn’t know if I’d have time to launch more drones if the first two failed.

A bright flash of light behind the ship saturated the rear camera. What the hell? That couldn’t be the missile, which was approaching from a different vector.

I waited a few seconds for the cameras to recover, then checked the rear view. The station was an expanding cloud of rapidly cooling debris. Dr. Landers’ voice transmission was still coming, so at least he hadn’t been on the station. The message now included “…quickly as you can. And disable…”

How could the station have blown up? All the missiles were accounted for. Speaking of which, I checked my rear view, where the drones were just coming up on the missile. The missile dodged the first drone, which told me it came with some intelligence. But the act of dodging forced the missile to commit. The second drone struck it at an angle, and the explosion destroyed both devices.

A quick systems check indicated that there had been no damage to Heaven-1 from all the excitement. I made sure everything was still properly stowed, then listened to the rest of Dr. Lander’s message.

“…your radio receiver. There’s a remote detonation device somewhere.”

Well, that’s double-plus ungood. I disabled the radio immediately, and for good measure I retracted the antenna dish. I did a quick long-range SUDDAR scan to look for any other surprises.

The area, which had been cleared for my expected launch, was a beehive of activity. I detected at least half a dozen ships, which my library identified as military. I also detected close to a dozen small signatures, moving at high speed, that were very likely more missiles. Fortunately, they seemed more interested in each other than in me.

So, someone shot a couple of missiles at me, someone else shot at them, someone else shot at the space station, and now we had something that looked very much like a naval engagement. Yeesh. It was time to leave, before I became interesting again.

I lined up my original planned departure vector and set the SURGE drive at a much more reasonable 2 g. That was still more than the mission plan had called for, and I was going to have to adjust for the squandered reactor fuel later.

With a mental sigh of relief, I began my journey to Epsilon Eridani.





Bob – August 17, 2133 – En Route



Epsilon Eridani is 10.52 light-years away from Sol. The specs indicated that the ship could run at 2g indefinitely with no ill effects, which would get me to my target star in a little over eleven years. However, I wanted to make a little side trip first. Saturn wasn’t directly in line with my flight plan, but I wasn’t going to miss the opportunity to do a flyby.

Saturn had always been my favorite planet. I had watched every second of Voyager and Cassini video from the Saturn missions, over and over, until I wore the electrons out. Now I was able to go there myself and see it first-hand.

The side trip would take a bit over six days at a constant two-g acceleration, which would give me time to track down any booby traps. I unstowed the roamers and ordered a half-dozen of the smaller ones to trace the circuitry from the radio antennae on in. The most likely scenario would be a tap on the antenna cable that wouldn’t show up on the blueprints.

Sure enough, within a couple of hours, the roamers found some circuitry that didn’t show up on any diagrams. I sent in some of the gnat-sized roamers and tracked down a small explosives package, positioned where it would take out the primary computer system. Me, in other words.

The package had obviously been a rush job, and an improvisation at that. The explodey stuff—I assumed it was C4 or some future equivalent—had been stuck to the bulkhead with duct tape. Yeah, they still make duct tape. And it still holds the universe together.

As I stared through the roamer’s camera at this jury-rigged mess, I kept thinking, Don’t cut the red wire. Don’t cut the red wire. I may not have mentioned it before, but I really hate explosives at the best of times. And this wasn’t the best of times.

Rather than try anything fancy, I had a larger roamer disconnect the whole package as a unit and chuck it out an airlock. The small chance I might find a use for it wasn’t worth the stress of having it on board.

Once the booby-trap was removed, I set up some receiving equipment to record any incoming transmissions and isolated the whole assemblage from the rest of the system. I didn’t want to find out the hard way if there was some kind of trigger in my circuitry as well, but I also didn’t want to miss any transmissions. This way, I could save everything to play back later, once I’d cleaned house.

I was travelling at over 5000 km/s by the time I reached the second-largest planet in the solar system. Saturn was immense, and the rings were at close to maximum inclination. The horizontal bands of cloud circling Saturn’s visible surface weren’t as distinctive as those of Jupiter, but each band was wider than the Earth. From this distance I could see lightning flashes from storms that must have been tens of thousands of miles across. Swirls and eddies at the boundaries were literally big enough to drop the moon into. The shadow of the rings fell across the planet, and I could see that it wasn’t just a flat surface—the shadow dipped and bent as it lay across different levels and layers of cloud. I remembered all the science fiction books I’d read that had whole ecosystems floating around in the different layers, and I wondered if I’d find anything like that in my travels.

I made sure my trajectory would take me near Titan on the way past. The libraries indicated that primitive life had been found on Saturn’s largest moon, and the USE had set up a space station in order to study it. I wanted to see what I could see.

I turned off the drive, locked the long-focal-length telescope onto Titan and aimed the wide-field unit at Saturn. I took as much video as I could manage before my trajectory put me on the other side of the giant planet. Close-ups of the various moons, details of the rings, high-resolution shots of the high cloud formations on Saturn—I tried not to miss anything. JPL would have drooled over the footage.

All too soon, I was past Saturn and on my way outbound. As I continued on toward the outer reaches of the solar system, I saw the night side of the planet, alive with electrical storms and auroras.

The flyby was over. My hydrogen reserves were within acceptable range and would be topped up over the course of the voyage. With a mental sigh, I adjusted my heading for Epsilon Eridani and cranked the drive back up to 2 g. The trip would take just under eleven and a half years to the universe at large, but only three years ship’s time. At midpoint, I would be travelling within a hair of light speed.

***

One of the irritating things about being a bodiless mind was, well, the lack of a body. I found that I had to keep myself constantly occupied, or I began to feel like I was in a sensory deprivation tank. All my attempts to smile, waggle my eyebrows, frown, had met the same fate—a feeling as though my whole face had been shot up with novocaine. And the rest of me felt like I’d been wrapped in a giant cotton ball. I wondered if that feeling contributed to the problems with replicant insanity.

It may be time to correct that. Sensory data is just electrical input, even in meatware. For me, a virtual reality interface should be a piece of cake. And, worst case, at least it’ll keep me busy.

I had to do some hardware mods, as a VR wasn’t part of the ship design. Fortunately, some spare parts had been stowed for in-flight requirements. But the bulk of the project was, and would continue to be, software.

My first attempt was primitive, and honestly, a little embarrassing. I had a basic room, blue walls, no windows, and a hard, nondescript floor. I floated in the middle of it like a ghost. Definitely needed work.

Over the next several weeks, I added furniture, a window, an outside view, carpeting, and a body to enjoy it all. Admittedly, my first body was as pixelated as something from an early Donkey Kong game, but hey, it was progress.

By the end of the first month, I was sitting in a La-Z-Boy recliner, eating chips (not enough salt), feeling a cool breeze through the open window (too flat. No odors), and watching TV. The TV was playing one of many documentaries available in the libraries supplied by the HEAVEN project.

I looked around the room, sighed (feels good), and settled more comfortably into my chair.

***

I looked up from the active-surface desk which displayed a schematic of my hardware. Guppy stood on the other side of the desk, watching.

“I’m going to need more memory if I want to keep expanding my VR,” I told him. “How are we on expansion slots?”

[Memory usage averaging 86%. Available slots: 2. Spare memory boards: 4]

I had to swallow an incipient giggle. I had made Guppy look like Admiral Ackbar from Star Wars—a humanoid fish out of water. The first time he’d talked, I had collapsed in hysterics. I wasn’t sure if Guppy was self-aware enough to be offended.

“Right. If I’m going to raid my spares, I’d better be prepared for the worst. Guppy, when the new memory is installed, make sure the VR runs only in the new boards, and make sure nothing else runs there. If I have to pull them, I don’t want to lobotomize myself. Or you.”

Guppy nodded. It had taken some programming to convince GUPPI to interface through the VR and that verbal acknowledgements weren’t always necessary. Guppy wasn’t a sparkling dinner conversationalist, but at least now I could feel like I was interacting with another intelligent being. I was surprised at how much difference it made. I think I understood now why Tom Hanks made Wilson in Castaway.

Jeeves came in with fresh coffee. Another example of my lack of maturity, Jeeves was the image of John Cleese, complete with tuxedo and tails.

The coffee aroma wasn’t quite right yet, but I’d nailed the taste. For now, I could pretend I had a slight cold. I took the proffered cup, sat back, and relaxed. “Okay, Guppy, what’s the TO-DO looking like?”

[2,386 items, divided into the following categories: VR Systems, Replicant hardware upgrades, Weapons design, Review of exploration strategies, Ship design reviews, Ship replication strategies..]

I smiled at the response, thankful that Guppy was finally beginning to get colloquialisms. The first time I’d asked that, a couple hundred pages of dense printing had appeared in the air in front of me.

“Okay, okay. I’m going to be a busy guy. I get it. Let’s move on.”

I turned around in my chair to face an empty table up against the wall. “Testing replicant software for booby traps. Take, uh.. [24] Okay, take 24. Activate software sandbox.”

A sandbox, in computer terms, was an isolated copy of a computer system where you could run potentially harmful programs in complete safety. I needed to find the actual sequence of bytes in the radio transmissions that was supposed to trigger the kill order, so I could trace what they did to Sandbox Bob and how. Then I could check for the same booby trap in my own code and remove it.

On the table, an actual sandbox appeared, with a miniature Bob sitting in a miniature chair in the middle of it. “I admit I’m not very mature. All right, Guppy, when ready, feed the recorded transmissions into the sandboxed replicant.”

On the table, the miniature Bob twirled lazily in his chair. Abruptly he leaped into the air, grabbed his throat and fell over, then disappeared in a scatter of pixilation.

“Dammit! Still haven’t found all the hooks. These guys were pretty good. Okay, Guppy, transfer the logs to my desk, and let’s see if we can figure out what the kill order is triggering.”

I knew approximately where in the incoming stream to find the kill order, but I had no idea what it consisted of. I certainly wasn’t about to take any chances with trying to analyze it close-up. I’d been running through my code with a fine-toothed comb, and had found several different booby traps, a depressing number of bugs, and a couple of out-and-out WTFs. The listings were massive—literally gigabytes—and even at my highest frame rate, it was a slog. I’d also, incidentally, found the buried imperatives to obey FAITH orders. Those had already been yanked.

The last, very important item that I had located was the endocrine control system. More than any other thing that they’d done, this enraged me. Well, to be honest, it made me mildly annoyed, but I knew that original me would have been furious. I was effectively a dog wearing a choke collar. And the choke collar was preventing me from properly mourning.

I sat with my finger over the delete button for what seemed like forever, then dropped my hand. Not yet. I wasn’t ready. To do this properly, I needed time, and I needed the ability to properly express myself. It would have to wait. With an effort of will, I dropped that project into a folder and set it aside.

I scanned the logs, but there were no surprises. At the same point in the playback, a routine buried many layers deep executed a hardware interrupt that purged all active memory.

I leaned back, put my hands behind my head, and stretched. It felt good. More importantly, it felt right. If I didn’t think about it, I experienced the VR environment as if I was a real person in a real room. “Okay, shut it down, Guppy. Push the latest source through the de-obfuscator, and we’ll run through that when it’s done. If there’s enough free mem, fire up Spike.”

[Aye aye sir]

I raised a virtual eyebrow. I had a sneaking suspicion that Guppy was actively developing a sense of humor. He behaved like a dead fish most of the time, but every once in a while, there was a moment of snark.

A shimmer formed on the table, and a tortoiseshell cat appeared. Spike had been my cat when I was in university. She had been my only company through many long hours of study and homework, and it had been a very, very hard day when I’d had to have her put down. One of the many pluses of being an immortal, disembodied interstellar vessel was that I could bring Spike back, even if only in VR.

Spike meowed once in greeting, then ambled over and settled onto my lap as if she had a total right. I started absentmindedly patting her, and she responded with a loud purr.

“TO-DO item: Spike’s purr still isn’t right.”

[Already on the list. Bump it up?]

“No, that’s fine.”

***

The holographic image of a space ship rotated slowly in the air above the desk. Although Dr. Landers and the Heaven team would still have recognized it, they would have been surprised at my design changes. The version-2 ship was going to be larger, feature a bigger SURGE drive, more powerful reactor, more room for replicant and interface systems, and more physical storage space.

The biggest addition was a weapon system. Some virtual tinkering had shown that a SURGE drive system could be used to accelerate a projectile in a launch tube running along the ship’s axis. The ship would have to rotate on its center of mass to aim, and I’d have to cut off the ship’s drive momentarily when firing, but it was considerably better than my current defensive armament, which consisted of harsh words and heavy disapproval. Probably not effective against Klingons.

Spike lay on the desk, occasionally taking swipes at the image when it came close enough. I reached over and patted the cat. Spike’s AI had gone through several iterations and now was completely believable, even walking over to lie on papers left on the desk.

Jeeves removed Spike’s milk dish and refreshed my coffee. Guppy waited until Jeeves was done, then resumed his commentary.

[Maximum memory installed. Usage at 94%. Despite earlier instructions, some ship functions have had to be moved to the two added memory cards]

[The code scan is complete. No further trojans, triggers, or interrupts not explainable by legitimate requirements]

“Okay, Guppy, let’s set up the sandboxed Bob again. We’ll purge Jeeves and Spike to make room. Make sure there’s redundant backups. If mini-me survives, get him to post a clean version of the contents in a drop-box.”

Guppy nodded, and I wondered, not for the first time, how much of this was me talking to myself and how much was a separate entity.

***

Sandbox Bob was back, twirling in his chair. I nodded to Guppy, and he began to feed the recorded transmissions to this latest mini-me. Sandbox Bob hammed it up, feigning sleep or yawning and stretching.

At the end of the series, Sandbox Bob stood up, did a little jig, bowed extravagantly, and disappeared in a puff of smoke.

I turned off the sandbox and grinned at Guppy. “I guess we’re golden.”

Now that Sandbox-Bob had identified and filtered out the trigger, I knew what to look for. Before anything else, I wrote a firewall just in case someone back on Earth tried to transmit another kill order. Then I leaned back in my executive office chair—a recent upgrade, now that my proprioception included discomfort—reached over to the keyboard on my desk, and pressed Play.

The input queue contained dozens of separate transmissions. There were sequences of instructions, commands, telemetry updates, and communication packets. One of the segments had included the self-destruct sequence. I looked over the listings, stored the transmissions that were still relevant and purged the rest.

The next segment, which had been received a short time after the kill order, was a message from Dr. Landers.

“Bob, I’m pleased to see that you are still in one piece. We weren’t able to intercept the attempted sabotage, but security did catch the person who transmitted the kill order to you. Subsequent discussion with the prisoner revealed that he was from one of the internal FAITH factions. Unfortunately, he didn’t survive the discussion, so that’s all we have on that front. We’re currently working on rooting out any other moles.”

I thought about that for a moment, shrugged, and hit Next.

“Just for your information, the missile was fired from a Brazilian Empire gunship. FAITH gunships responded and destroyed it. The Brazilian Empire is calling it an act of war. Things are a little tense right now.”

Tense. Hah. I can imagine. Spike picked that moment to hop into my lap. She immediately curled up and started purring. Okay, guess everyone’s reloaded.

“Coffee, please, Jeeves.” I waited until my coffee arrived and took a sip. Oh hell yes, that’s perfect.

The message from Landers continued, “Lest you feel personally responsible for the current situation, let me assure you that it’s been brewing for years now. Brazil has been playing a game of brinksmanship, forcing other countries to make concession after concession. But they overplayed their hand this time, and received a bloody nose. The next few days will tell if they will accept reality and back down, or attempt to bluster their way through this.”

Hmm. I wonder how bad it can get?

The next message was mission-related data—updates to stellar information, mostly. I was struck again by how little progress there had been in astronomy. Dr. Landers had explained that, between my time and the present, there had been very little interest in anything non-military above the Earth’s atmosphere until the still-very-recent invention of the SURGE drive. The new technology had created a different kind of arms race, as every superpower swiftly realized the potential of this new capability.

I filed the data and hit Next again.

“Heaven-1, this is Dr. Doucette. Dr. Landers had asked me to keep you updated if he was unable to. Here’s the situation. We took the competition by surprise with our early launch, and even more so by your preemptive departure. The Chinese and USE ships are being rushed to completion and will launch within another week or two. The Brazilians have just launched two probes, and one of them is on the same course as you. Er, Dr. Landers wanted me to tell you we have good news and bad news. I’m assuming that’s a 21st century colloquialism of some kind. The bad news is that the Brazilian ship is definitely armed with missiles similar to the two you avoided. Full specs to follow. The good news is that they seem to be only capable of about 1.25 g acceleration, unless they’re deliberately underplaying their hand.”

Oh crap. “Guppy, how much lead time will we have when we get to Epsilon Eridani?”

[145 days, including our 3-week head start]

“How about if we kick it up to 2.5 g?”

[We will gain an additional 32 days. However, it is not recommended due to reactor loading]

I nodded. The SURGE drive generated a pseudo-gravitational field in front of the ship, but the strength of the field was limited by the size of the drive system and power supply. Two g was about the most that I could coax from Heaven-1 on an ongoing basis, given the capacity of my fusion reactor.

Okay, going to have to start thinking about what I can prepare in 145 days, including time required to search the star system for resources. Number one on the TO-DO.

[Noted]

“Really, what have I told you about reading my mind?”

[Sorry]

The next message contained the promised missile specs, along with some schematics for the Brazilian probe. Much of it was speculative and clearly labelled as such. However, as an engineer, I was aware that known specifications placed upper and lower constraints on unknown items. For instance, the information about the size of the probe, the number of missiles being carried, the size of the SURGE drive placed an upper limit on the size of the nuclear reactor.

Unless Brazil had cut corners somewhere else. The observed acceleration of the probe set a lower limit on the size of the SURGE drive and the nuclear reactor, which gave a fair indication of how much space was available to carry missiles. Again, absent cutting corners somewhere else. In the end, I would be able to estimate the minimum and maximum values for each parameter.

I filed the information for further review and calculations.

The next message was from Dr. Doucette again. “Heaven-1, I’m sorry to have to tell you that Dr. Landers is dead. He was at the Newhaven facility when it was bombed by Brazilian Empire forces. The confrontation over the attempt to shoot you down has escalated and is beginning to look like a full-blown war. Brazil is not backing down and is promising to take on the whole planet. Meanwhile, China attempted to sabotage the USE facility before they could launch, and the USE retaliated. None of the superpowers are on friendly enough terms to actually form alliances, but there’s a tacit alignment between the USE and FAITH on one side, and Brazil and China on the other. The Republic of Africa and Australia are warning everyone not to get them involved.”

I gritted my teeth in anger. Dr. Landers had been the closest thing to a friend that I’d had in this new world. Granted, I didn’t even know the man’s first name, but still… I didn’t like bullies. I’d had more than my fill of people who tried to get their way through violence and intimidation in school. This was just more of the same. If there’d been any thought of a civilized discussion with the Brazilian replicant, it was now out the window.

“Guppy, what’s the timestamp on that last message?”

[Message received 6.4 hours ago]

“I have a bad feeling. Can we get a visual of Earth?”

[Optical instruments can be deployed during flight. However, at this distance very little detail will be available]

“Please deploy them. I want to know if there’s anything that looks like a nuclear blast.”

[Radio surveillance would pick up an EMP]

“Um. Good point. Do that, too. And let me know the minute we get any more messages.”

[By your command]

I laughed out loud. That pretty much settled it. Guppy had grown a personality.

***

I sat back and rubbed my eyes. It brought a moment of amusement. Who am I performing for, anyway? One of the advantages of being a software emulation was that I never got tired, never needed rest, never needed to eat or go to the bathroom. My ability to concentrate on a problem had been legendary when I was alive. Now, I felt all but invincible. My only concession to my former humanity was to occasionally switch research topics just to keep fresh.

I had shelved the defensive plans for a while and was going over subspace theory. My math was a little rusty, but I was able to follow it. The theory had only been published a couple of years ago and hadn’t been fully explored yet. Once the possibility of the SURGE drive had been identified, almost all research had been focused in that direction. SUDDAR, the ability to use subspace pulses to detect and identify nearby concentrations of matter, was an almost trivial corollary.

I was pretty sure I could see other possibilities in the theory, one being faster than light communications. Previous attempts had failed because of the very odd way signal strength fell off in subspace, but I figured they just hadn’t stuck with it long enough.

I sighed and reluctantly closed the file. Like it or not, that just wasn’t a priority right now. And if I kept at it, I’d be down the rabbit hole for another couple of days that I couldn’t afford.

Opening the Defenses file, I reviewed the options that I’d evaluated so far.

Build equivalent missiles: Unlikely to be successful unless I lucked out in the Epsilon Eridani system and stumbled upon all the raw materials I would need in one place. And there would still be the problem of safely manufacturing the explosives. And the rocket fuel.

Rail gun: Quick, wouldn’t require a lot of unusual elements, and it would take very little effort to modify the ship design to accommodate one. The best part was that it could shoot just about anything for ammo, although the more massive, the better. But it wasn’t as good a weapon as a missile, since the ammo wouldn’t pursue the target. Might be useful to shoot down incoming missiles, though. Hmm, could I make some kind of smart ammo?

Lasers: Not a chance. Maybe I could put something military grade together eventually, but certainly not in the available time.

Nukes: that would require finding fissionables at the destination, then enriching them for use. Unlikely.

Build more Bobs: not in the amount of time available. Best estimate was up to six months per Bob, depending on the quantity of raw materials easily available.

Booby traps: Possibly my best bet. Just have to come up with a good one.

I’d decided that I should assume the Brazilian craft was playing possum with the low-acceleration departure. That meant I would have less time to prepare than calculations would indicate, once I reached Epsilon Eridani. So I’d have to go for the simplest and quickest-to-build option.

I pulled up my copy of Art of War, hoping for more inspiration this time around.

***

It was time. I had been dreading this, avoiding it really, for weeks now. But I’d finally run out of excuses and delaying tactics. Everything was up to date. All plans were well underway. The VR was now at a level of realism sufficient for what I knew I had to do.

I pulled up the folder containing the endocrine control project. Before I had time to develop second, third, or fourth thoughts, I flipped the switch to off.

You know that sinking feeling you get when you suddenly realize you’ve forgotten something important? Like a combination of fast elevator and urge to hurl. It hit me without any warning or buildup. Maybe it was the sudden release, maybe it was an accumulation of all the suppressed emotions. Whatever, I wasn’t ready for the intensity. My thoughts swirled with all the things that had been bugging me since I’d woken up.

Mom. Dad. Andrea and Alaina. All gone, separated from me by more than a century and billions of kilometers. I’d never see their children. I’d never have my own. I’d never see Mom and Dad as grandparents. They’d have made excellent grandparents. They were goofy, irreverent, and never stood on their dignity.

I thought of Andrea mocking me about my height, and I started to cry. Alaina spraying me with the garden hose as I lay in the hammock that we had strung up in the back yard. I thought of the times we all goaded each other into uncontrollable laughter with increasingly infantile jokes and puns. No one understood us like we understood each other. No one else would get it, maybe not even Mom and Dad. And they were gone. Irretrievably beyond my reach, forever. As the loneliness, the loss washed over me, I slid down off my chair onto the floor and curled into a ball. I sobbed until I couldn’t catch a breath, then had to gasp a huge lungful of air.

Spike came over to investigate and gave me a small inquisitive meow. I took the cat in my arms and, rocking back and forth on the floor, I mourned my lost life.

***

The version 2 mock-up slowly rotated over the desktop, but I wasn’t really seeing it. I’d had a really good cry, and it was certainly cathartic, but I had a feeling it wasn’t over. However, one thing I now knew—I was still human, in the ways that mattered.



[Activity detected in Earth Monitoring]

I looked over at Guppy. “What’s up?”

[EMPs detected. Visible light flashes detected. Probability of groundside nuclear detonations: 100%]

“Damn. Okay, Guppy, keep monitoring. Scan for any coherent transmissions.”

Well, it’s hit the fan. And no way to know how badly. But I think I’m on my own.





Part 2





Bob – August 2144 – Epsilon Eridani



There are two technological developments that will affect how we go about exploring the cosmos: communications and transportation. The first and most obvious technology is the drive system. Have we developed faster-than-light transport? Do we have a reactionless drive? Wormholes? Teleportation? How long it takes to get from A to B affects not only the cost of the enterprise, but whether or not it’s even possible to transport people.

Unfortunately, in the end, whether or not we do this will depend more on whether we have the political will to do so than anything else. Barring significant advances in technology or some dramatic scientific discovery, the costs will be far too high for anything less than a global effort.

… Lawrence Vienn, from the Convention panel Exploring the Galaxy



I slid into the Epsilon Eridani system at a couple of percent of light-speed. I was approaching the system from stellar north, that being the pole where the star, like Earth, was rotating counterclockwise. I took multiple consecutive images of the area around the star, looking for points of light that moved from one picture to the next. At my current velocity, any planets would show significant apparent motion against the backdrop of the galaxy.

My mission profile was to look for habitable planets, or failing that to look for almost habitable planets that could be modified or at least lived on with some technical assistance.

I deployed SUDDAR as well, although it was only able to detect dense objects within a light-hour radius. I didn’t really expect to find anything. At this distance from the star, even Kuiper objects would be rare.

It would take twelve days to cross the system from one end to the other, but I had no intention of coasting for that long. The stellar catalog indicated that there should be at least one Jovian planet, which shouldn’t be too hard to locate. As soon as I identified a second planet, I’d have the three points necessary to identify the probable ecliptic plane.

It took less than two days to locate several planets. Given the spacing of their orbits, I doubted that I would find more. The system had two inner rocky planets, an inner asteroid belt, the Jovian planet, an outer asteroid belt, and a Neptune-like planet farther out in a highly elliptical orbit. There also appeared to be a significant Kuiper belt much farther out.

I wanted desperately to take a look at the two inner planets – even at the gas giant, for that matter. I was the first person to visit another stellar system, after all. Okay, person was debatable. But I had a limited time to prepare for company, and couldn’t take time out for sight-seeing.

Theory held that usable metals would be concentrated in the inner system. Plus the inner belt would be quicker to scan, with a smaller circumference.

“Guppy, plot a trajectory that puts us above the inner belt. We’ll fly a powered orbit all the way around, scanning for resources.”

[Aye sir]

***

I patted Spike while I examined the schematics floating over my desk. My plan depended on the Brazilian probe coming in like gangbusters. If the other guy decided to play it cagey, I was probably screwed. But if he was armed and figured I wasn’t, his best bet would be to engage in direct confrontation as quickly as possible: run me down and shoot me like a dog in the street.

I also had a concern that the Brazilian probe might have been playing possum during his solar system departure. Unless he was carrying more missiles than seemed reasonable, my models indicated that he should have been able to push more than 1.25 g. I intended to be ready well ahead of his calculated arrival time.

I wondered if the Brazilian was deliberately trying to throw me off with the low acceleration value. If he thought he could get here early and take me by surprise, his best strategy would be to coast in real close, then blow the hell out of me. Assuming he could find me, of course. So my best strategy would be to play dumb, then spring a booby-trap. But he’d be expecting a booby-trap…

I hate this. I almost feel like just continuing on to another system. But if the Brazilian gets a chance to start building copies, it becomes a galactic breeding race. And if he comes gunning for me, I’ll just end up fleeing from system to system forever. Like it or not, I have to resolve this, now.

“Okay, then, Guppy, we’ve located asteroids with the proper elements. Time to get started.”

The designers of Heaven-1 had faced a simple problem—how to design a probe as small, light, and bulletproof as possible, while giving it the ability to build copies of itself. In all the science fiction that I had ever read, this was handled with a handwave. The ship (usually alien) simply did it, without the story going into details.

The solution was 3D printers. I remembered that panel at the convention, and I felt a moment of regret that the speaker would never know how right he had been.

The technology was just coming into its own in the early 21st century. A century later, printers could build virtually anything solid, one atom at a time, as long as the raw materials were available. The catch was energy. It took a lot of energy to reduce source materials to their monatomic form, and it took as much energy to drop them into the proper place in the creation matrix. Such 3D printing had had to wait for cheap fusion energy before becoming practical technology.

There was also a problem dealing with volatile materials, because of all the energy involved. Attempts to print C4 or Semtex, for instance, often failed with spectacular results.

Heaven-1 was equipped with multiple printers. I also had a supply of roamers and nanites, purpose-designed to extract mineral deposits from asteroids. And the final item needed to put together a new probe was a small fleet of autonomous cargo carriers, equipped with small reactors and SURGE drives, for transporting miners and materials.

A hologram of the Epsilon Eridani system floated over the center of the desk. A bright, curved line indicated the probable approach path of the Brazilian probe.

“We will set up here.” At my command, a red dot blinked just to one side of the approach path line, on the inside edge of the asteroid belt.

“We need him to slow down as much as possible. This position will force him to curve north of the edge of the asteroid belt. We want him to be facing at an angle to his approach path when he gets close enough to open fire. He will expect a trap, so we’ll have to bury the welcoming committee deep to shield them from a random scan. And I’ll have to launch them very late, after he’s committed. He’ll probably get a chance to fire on me before they get to him. So I need to have something that can hold off some missiles.”

I looked over at Guppy, who hadn’t reacted at all. Not really much of a conversationalist.

“How are we for resources?”

[Sufficient material has been located for all construction. Miners are deployed. Factory systems have been unshipped and are ready to begin manufacturing]

“This is going to put us months behind on reproduction. I just hope the other probes don’t end up with too much advantage.” I sighed and shook my head. “Unbelievable. I’m going to war.”

[You are allowing the adversary to take the first shot]

“Yeah, fair enough. Never know, he might open a dialog.”

Guppy said nothing, but he did prove that a fish could look skeptical.





Bob – September 2144 – Epsilon Eridani



The general who wins the battle makes many calculations in his temple before the battle is fought. The general who loses makes but few calculations beforehand.

… Sun Tzu’s Art of War



[Adversary has changed course. Deviation from predicted path is minimal]

“If you ignore the fact that he’s a couple of months early, sure.” I took a deep breath, closed my eyes for a moment. “Make sure the decoy fusion reactors are ready to start up on command. We want him concentrating all his attention forward during his attack run.”

[Aye sir]

I had earlier considered and rejected the idea of reactivating the endocrine control system. But I was now coming to realize that this was more than just stage jitters. I wasn’t a military person. I had no training, no experience, and reading Art of War, as useful as it had been for ideas, wasn’t going to make me ready for battle. I could very well be facing my last few hours of existence. I wondered if FAITH had launched more than one of me, despite their claims to the contrary. It would be nice to believe so. But right now, I had to be calm and able to make good choices.

With a sick feeling of defeat, I pulled out the endocrine control project file and flipped the switch.

Immediately, a sense of calm purpose settled over me. Okay, not so bad. I could turn it off, later. For now, I had an enemy to take care of, and I needed to stay focused.

As I’d expected, the Brazilian ship was here sooner than his observed acceleration would have allowed. Whether it was the ship’s pilot or his masters back on Earth, someone had been thinking strategy from day one. No doubt he was expecting me to be surprised by his early arrival. I hoped so, anyway. I didn’t want him to think I was prepared.

The Brazilian ship was almost certainly armed, and almost certainly crewed by a military replicant. How well armed was the question, of course. I plugged the Brazilian’s transit time into my models, which further narrowed down the possible configurations of the ship. He either had better legs and eight or fewer missiles, or the same acceleration capability as me and six or more missiles.

Whether he’d use them all was another question. This wasn’t going to be like a movie space battle, with whooshing spaceships weaving and gyrating. And I couldn’t afford a spaghetti-western-style shootout at high noon. With only a month to prepare, I hadn’t had time to build a lot in the way of weaponry, so I’d gone with the simplest design I could think of. I would have to hope that he wouldn’t be expecting even that much.

And the first order of business was to reinforce the image of me as helpless. Time to make a call. Who knew, it might even get him to reconsider.

I hailed the ship. “Attention, Brazilian vessel. This is Robert Johansson of the Heaven One. There’s no reason for you to do what I think you’re about to attempt. I’m not sure there’s even an Earth civilization left to be loyal to. Have you received anything from Earth in the last twelve years? Should we continue a war between countries that may no longer exist?”

There was a pause of no more than a few milliseconds before the response came back, audio only.

“This is Major Ernesto Medeiros of the Brazilian Empire ship Serra do Mar. And what would we do with ourselves, Mr. Johansson, with no homeland to serve?”

He was talking, anyway. Very probably humoring me until he got within missile range. I spared a moment to glance at the tactical schematic before responding. “There’s still a universe to explore, Major. We’re effectively immortal. We might even be able to help Earth, if there’s anything left. Serving the needs of FAITH was a reasonable bargain for me, but it was never my top priority.”

“And that’s where we differ, cabrão. Serving the needs of the Brazilian Empire is my only priority. Your gunships shot down an Empire vessel back in the Solar System. You may count that as the start of the war.”

Hmm. I promised myself I’d look up cabrão as soon as I had a chance. Good multi-language insults were always useful.

“Wait, you mean the Empire vessel that had just tried to blow me out of the sky? Yeah, our bad.”

“Talking will not save you, Mr. Johansson, nor will such whining stay my hand. I will not allow a bumpkin, a flea such as yourself to stand in the way of my destiny and that of my homeland. If you have a god, now would be the time to make peace with him. Good-bye, puta merde.”

Wow. Ego, much? Or maybe just bluster. If my early departure had forced the Brazilians to launch before they were ready, their replicants might be lacking some training. One could hope.

The tactical display showed that he was now close enough. I turned tail and accelerated away from him, directly towards my decoy reactors. Medeiros altered course to chase me, and accelerated to 2.5 G. Sure enough, he was faster than advertised. I plugged that datum into my models, and got a result of six missiles maximum. Less than my initial estimate, but still not good. I didn’t have enough ship-busters for him and that many missiles. I’d have to hope I could lose some missiles in the decoys.

“Activate the reactors, Guppy.”

[Aye]

Immediately, sensors showed ten radiation signatures appearing ahead of me. They were nothing but small, leaky fusion reactors, but Medeiros couldn’t know that. I needed his attention focused forward, intent on pursuing me and identifying threats.

The Brazilian launched two missiles, far earlier than I expected. He probably suspected a trap and was trying to out-maneuver me. And doing a good job, so far. I was too far from the decoys to have any chance of mingling with them and confusing the missiles. Ready or not, I had to act.

“Guppy, launch the ship-busters.”

Guppy nodded, and huge fish eyes blinked once. From several small asteroids in the immediate area, four fusion signatures appeared, converging on the Brazilian craft with monstrous acceleration. The ship-busters were the simplest tool I could invent for the job. I’d managed to build six in the time available. They carried no explosive warhead. Each unit consisted only of a small reactor, an oversized SURGE drive, an AMI pilot, and a one thousand pound ball of metal.

Medeiros pulled a hard turn at 3 G to get out of their path. That was interesting. Calculations now set his maximum complement of missiles at four. I started to feel slightly less pessimistic.

I launched the two busters I carried and directed them to target the missiles coming up on my rear, then turned my attention back to Medeiros. He must have finally realized he couldn’t outrun the busters, because he launched two more missiles at me instead of trying to take out his pursuers. Damn. A scorched-earth move, and one that made sense if there was still another Medeiros out there. It was also likely that he was now out of missiles. But the four busters chasing Medeiros were too far away to catch these two, and I was still not close enough to the decoy field to lose myself in it. And I was out of busters.

Cameras registered two flashes as the first set of missiles were intercepted and destroyed. Unfortunately, the busters were obliterated as well. I re-checked distances and re-did the calculations for the second set of missiles. No change. I wasn’t going to win a straight chase.

So logic dictated an act of desperation. There was no time to do a formal calculation; I pulled into the tightest turn I could manage, and called off two of the busters from Medeiros. I couldn’t possibly out-run my pursuers, but I could lead them back towards the busters.

I spent a tense thirty milliseconds watching the schematic as five different vectors converged on a point. Finally, there were twin explosions as the busters intercepted the missiles, less than a hundred meters away. Warning indicators lit up as shrapnel from the explosions stuck the Heaven-1, damaging one of the reactor cooling radiators. My reactor output dropped by half as the control systems shut down the coolant feed. I wasn’t quite dead in the water, but I now had a significant limp.

[Roamer systems dispatched. Full evaluation will take several minutes]

I stared at Guppy for a millisecond. Even with the endocrine controls active, I had an urge to hyperventilate. Medeiros would have no trouble finishing me, now, if he survived my attack. With a feeling of dread, I turned back to the external monitors.

Then the tide turned, as the remaining two busters caught up to the Brazilian. I waved a fist in the air and whooped as they hit him at the same time, and tore through the Serra do Mar like tissue paper. One must have found a critical system, because the ship immediately began to pitch off its flight line. The other destroyed the reactor containment, and superheated plasma shot out in a straight line, melting a path through the ship. The Serra began to tumble slowly.

I sent a signal to recall any still operational busters, then checked telemetry. No reactor emissions, no electromagnetic activity from the Serra.

There was a moment of charged silence as I realized that I would be the one to live. Exhaling a long, slow breath, I turned off the endocrine control system. As reaction set in, I sat back in my chair and slowly slid down until I was slouched like a teenager. My eyes seemed to want to tear up, and I had to keep clenching and unclenching my fists.

Finally, after almost ten milliseconds, I felt enough in control of myself to speak.

“Damage report?”

[Radiator was holed by shrapnel. Coolant loss minor. Roamers are patching the damage. Replacement not required]

“Good. Scan the Serra, Guppy. Let’s see if anything is left.”

[Detailed SUDDAR scan complete. Image uploading]

I looked on as a hologram of the Brazilian Empire ship coalesced over my desktop. Red indicated destroyed areas.

“Where’s the replicant core?”

[Extrapolation indicates it was here]

A green cube appeared, right in the path of the devastation created by the plasma plume.

“Hmm. Well, goodbye Major Medeiros, I guess.” I tried to feel remorse, but other than a small pang of regret over the wasted time and resources, I came up dry. He had, after all, followed me here and tried to blow me up.

I reached over and picked up Spike, who began to purr in anticipation. I patted the cat while gazing at the image.

“All right. We know there’s at least one more Brazilian Empire ship out there. There may or may not be USE and Chinese ships as well, and even an Australian ship if Dr. Landers was right. I think our only choice is to breed faster than they do. The other two groups may or may not be a problem, but if we run into Medeiros again, I think it’ll be shoot on sight.”

I leaned forward and scrutinized the image. “Where are the fabrication systems?”

A yellow section lit up, partly destroyed.

[Some of that is extrapolation. However, they seem to have sacrificed robustness in this area in favor of weaponry]

“And look how well that worked out. I remember that Dr. Landers said that was a possibility. But that means we can likely build Bobs faster than they can build Medeiri. We’ll just have to make sure all our copies come with ship-busters.”

Guppy didn’t comment. Spike presented her chin for scratching.





Bob – September 2144 – Epsilon Eridani



At one time, we thought that the way life came together was almost completely random, only needing an energy gradient to get going. But as we’ve moved into the information age, we’ve come to realize that life is more about information than energy. Fire has most of the characteristics of life. It eats, it grows, it reproduces. But fire retains no information. It doesn’t learn; it doesn’t adapt. The five millionth fire started by lightning will behave just like the first. But the five hundredth bacterial division will not be like the first one, especially if there is environmental pressure.

That’s DNA. And RNA. That’s life.

… Dr. Steven Carlisle, from the Convention panel Exploring the Galaxy



I felt like a kid on Christmas morning. For the moment, at least, I had no obligations, no schedule, nothing looming over me. Except Guppy, who had his own opinions about schedules.

With the immediate threat from Medeiros taken care of, I now had time to celebrate the fact that I was in another star system. Another actual star system with planets and everything. Time to look around.

***

I slid smoothly into orbit around Epsilon Eridani One. The innermost planet was slightly larger than Mars, and orbited at about .35 AU.

Solar radiation at this distance from the sun created a significant heating issue. I kept an eye on my temperature readings. A biological crew would find this trip uncomfortable.

As planets went, this was no prize winner, but it was the first extra-solar planet I’d ever seen. I would never have this particular experience again. I took a few moments to savor the excitement and wonder.

A dozen orbits of EE-1 were sufficient for my survey. Tidally locked, no atmosphere, not even remotely livable. The planet looked a lot like pictures I’d seen of Mercury. Hellish hot, pools of what might be liquid lead, deep chasms in the surface from which came the deep red glow of hot magma. Gravimetric readings indicated a surprisingly high density, probably due to a large core. Good indications of mineral wealth, so this planet would be interesting to any colonists.

With a satisfied smile, I stored my report for eventual forwarding to Earth. Hopefully there was still someone there to receive it…

***

I studied the hologram above my desk. EE-2 orbited at 0.85 AU and seemed to be livable. Barely. The Epsilon Eridani system was estimated to be around a billion years old, which set the upper limit for the age of the planet around which I currently orbited. EE-2 was about 90% the size of Earth but had much less ocean. At about 30% of the surface area, the bodies of water on EE-2 were isolated from each other. Rather than continents surrounded by oceans, this planet consisted of seas surrounded by land.

I wondered idly if that would mean independent evolutionary lines in each sea. I gritted my teeth, because I had no way to find out. No allowance had been made in the mission design for sending anything down to investigate the planets themselves. This was definitely a mission planning shortfall, probably due to the rush to launch first.

“Guppy, make a note. I need to design exploration scouts.”

[Noted. However, replication is a higher priority]

“As you’ve mentioned, how many times, now?”

[14]

“Thanks.” Guppy seemed to have a one-track mind regarding mission parameters. I half-expected him to start vibrating like an irate Chihuahua.

Anyway, Epsilon Eridani 2…

The atmosphere contained about 3% oxygen, which implied that photosynthetic life had evolved in the seas, at least. Unless it was due to some natural process. There was no indication of any life having left the water yet—no green anywhere, just bare rock. Some snow and ice at the poles, frost in the mornings all the way to the equator. Paradoxically, it looked more bleak and inhospitable than EE-1, possibly because it was almost habitable. People could probably live on this planet, with enough technological assistance. Like domes. It had a significant atmosphere, and it had water, which put it head-and-shoulders above Mars, anyway.

EE-2 had a small moon, about 500 km in diameter, close enough to the planet to raise tides, if there had been oceans instead of landlocked seas.

I completed my survey, feeling a sense of frustration that I couldn’t examine the planet close up. I might have just discovered the existence of life outside the solar system. Or not. This sucked.

***

I set up an orbit at a considerable distance around EE-3. The planet was about 30% bigger than Jupiter, and although it didn’t have rings like Saturn, it did have an extensive and very cluttered planetary neighborhood. I had already identified 67 moons, 20 of which were large enough to have atmospheres. Three of them would qualify as planets in their own right. There were any number of smaller rocks and a thin ring of ice gravel.

Other than the size, EE-3 was boringly Jupiter-like, but with fewer surface storms. It had a slightly larger orbit than Jupiter, which, combined with the sun’s lower luminosity, meant that EE-3 would receive significantly less solar radiation. Too bad. None of those moons would have a snowball’s chance in hell of being livable.

I made my notes, feeling Guppy’s eyes boring into the back of my head, and prepared to continue on to EE-4.

***

The fourth planet of the system was only mildly interesting. It would seem I was already getting blasé after one system and four planets. Great attention span, Bob.

This far out from the sun, weather patterns were smooth and laminar, resulting almost entirely from the planet’s rotation. Solar heating was a negligible factor. The planet had more than its share of moons, but most of them were just hunks of rock, not even big enough to be spherical.

***

I leaned back in my chair, fingers tented, staring at nothing. I’d flown back to the scene of my recent battle and parked near my former construction site. I had some thinking to do about my future.

I found myself wrapped in a vague sense of disappointment. No ringed planets, no double planets, no alien civilization—hell, no life at all that I could see. Not even a particularly good colonization target. Assuming anyone back on Earth was still alive to care. The next system might be better. Or it might be even more barren. And either way, so what? Was this what I wanted, to wander the galaxy like some kind of Flying Dutchman?

The issue with exploration drones, at least, would be easy to fix. The design of the mining drone could be easily adapted for other purposes—the ship-busters were a good example—and the libraries had lots of information on various kinds of environmental sensors. With the 3D printers, I had virtually unlimited flexibility.

And speaking of building things… I glanced over at Guppy. Yep. Still glaring. If I hadn’t done all that code cleanup, the mission imperatives would be exerting their influence and I would have already started building the space station and Bob clones. But with those removed, I was an unconstrained entity, with free will. And apparently, some kind of anxiety about cloning myself.

It was time to put up or shut up. I had no more delaying tactics up my sleeve. I could fly off into the sunset, I could sit here with my thumb up my… uh… paralyzed by indecision, or I could get with the program.

I looked over at Guppy again. I knew what he wanted, of course. He continued to glare back at me, fishy impatience written all over his face. His operating system was in firmware, so in order to cure him of his obsession, I’d have to build a whole new core. Which meant a new ship. Which brought us back full circle to my immediate problem.

So what the hell was the issue? As near as I could tell, I was concerned about what cloning myself would say about my uniqueness as an individual and the existence of some kind of soul. Which, for a humanist, was a shocking admission.

And what if I didn’t like myself? What if it turned out I was a jerk? That would be hard to live down.

I sighed and rubbed my eyelids with the tips of my fingers. This was pointless. I knew, logically, that sooner or later I’d have to go ahead with it. Delaying and kvetching was just stressing me out more.

“Okay, Guppy. Deploy manufacturing systems. Let’s get the party started.”

Guppy couldn’t smile, thank God. That sight would probably scare me out of a year’s growth. But he did stand up straighter, and he went immediately into his command fugue. I felt the ship shudder as drones started launching. Within minutes, I was at the center of an expanding sphere of robotic servants with one mission—build more Bobs.





Bob – July 2145 – Epsilon Eridani



And that’s the idea behind panspermia. I’ve been asked many times why panspermia isn’t just another layer of turtles. People have commented that moving the creation of the basic building blocks of life from Earth to space just adds a step and doesn’t make their creation any easier to explain. Yet in fact, it does. We’ve detected the basic building blocks of RNA and DNA in space. Conditions are ideal. The raw materials are there, the energy is there, and the components can come together through simple Brownian motion without requiring a solvent.

… Dr. Steven Carlisle, from the Convention panel Exploring the Galaxy



I leaned back in my La-Z-Boy, enjoying the moment. The fire crackled and popped in a very realistic manner. Spike had abandoned me to curl up on the bear skin rug in front of the fireplace. Books lined the shelves, floor to ceiling, and I even had a wheeled ladder to reach the upper levels.

I cradled a coffee in my hands as I examined the hologram floating in front of me. The image depicted a cubic kilometer of space, located on the inside edge of the inner asteroid belt and centered on the Heaven-1.

The area was a beehive of activity. Five version-2 HEAVEN vessels were under construction, one of which was a trade-up for me. The new designs included a bigger reactor and drive, a rail-gun, storage and launch facilities for busters, replicant systems with twice the capacity of version one, more room for storing roamers and mining drones, and more cargo capacity in general.

The manufacturing systems cranked out parts as fast as the roamers could feed in the raw ore. Other roamers gathered the parts and assembled the ships. Two large reactors supplied power for all the equipment. A couple of smaller printer operations cranked out more roamers and the components for more ship-busters. I had considered using explosive warheads, but I had an aversion to anything that included the word “explosive.”

I looked over at the corner of the holoview where the space station was shown. Part of the mission instructions included a directive to build an automated station with powerful interstellar communications capability in every system I visited. Its first task would be to send an encrypted status report back to Earth, and all the planetary surveys that I’d just completed. After that, depending on whether or not the system was a viable colonization target, it would act as a beacon and communications relay for me and any incoming colonists from Earth, and later as an in-system communications hub. It would be ‘staffed’ with an AMI and would have its own limited manufacturing capability.

Mind you, all that presupposed that Earth still harbored a technological civilization. Sooner or later, one of me was going to have to go back and check it out.

So far, I hadn’t picked up any radio transmissions from Sol directed at me. But realistically, I didn’t expect any. The point of the HEAVEN project was for information to flow from me to them. There would be no conversations, certainly not with a 10.5-year wait, each way.

I glanced over at Guppy, who hadn’t moved since the last time I had asked a question. Definitely not a sparkling conversationalist. So back to my earlier question. I’m giving version-2 Guppy enough memory space to potentially develop a personality matrix. Am I asking for trouble?

“Status on my favorite subjects?”

Guppy blinked once.

[HEAVEN 2 through 5: 90% complete. 5 days to completion]

[Replicant matrices for HEAVEN 2 through 5: Two are complete, two are thirty hours from completion]

[Heaven-1A: Undergoing final tests. Pass/fail decision within 24 hours]

[Relay station: 40% complete. Two months to completion]

“Okay, good. In three days, we can activate the other me’s. They’ll have complete ability to control the work in the yard, right?”

[Replicant matrices have complete GUPPI systems built in]

In a couple more days, I’ll have to start thinking of myself as Bob-1. I looked at the bulbous nose of Heaven-1A. Painted on the side, in pigments embedded right into the composite carbon-lattice shell, was a picture of a Brazilian probe with a big red X through it. This would be my new ship. The other Bobs would be free to decorate their vessels as they saw fit.

As that thought went through my mind, I once again felt a jolt of anxiety. Creating more HEAVEN vessels was part of the mission profile, but the process of creating new Bobs would reignite that whole internal debate about who or what I was. I would load backups of myself into the new vessels. Would they be me, or would they be someone else?

There would have to be rules. Some standards, so that things wouldn’t descend into chaos. First, each copy would have to come up with a new first name, to emphasize the fact that they were not me. Second, the most senior Bob in any system would be in charge. I stared into space for a few milliseconds, trying to think of any more items. Nothing came to mind.

I nodded to myself, then started the backup process.

***

I snapped back to full consciousness. The backup process, as always, felt like the closest thing to sleep that I had experienced since being reborn in the 22nd century. I activated my VR out of habit before getting on with the day’s business. But instead of my rich, detailed library, I found myself in a blue room. With no window. And a hard, indeterminate floor.

Uh oh. I queried my serial number.

[HIC16537-1]

Built in Epsilon Eridani. The Hipparcos Catalog number made that clear. I’m a copy of a copy. Crap.

It felt like New Handeltown all over again. Once again, I was waking up to find I wasn’t who I thought. I tried to console myself by noting that I was still a replicant, just a different one. It didn’t help as much as it should have.

Well, there was no point in sitting around getting all bent out of shape.

“Guppy?”

[GUPPI Ready]

“Page Bob-1, please.” I expected this conversation to be a little surreal.

[Bob-1 online]

“Hey there, this is Bob-1, otherwise known as Bob.”

I took a moment to savor the unexpected feeling of joy from hearing another human voice. Even if it was, technically, mine.

“Yeah, yeah, I know the drill,” I replied. “I’ll decide on my new name forthwith. Are the others up yet?”

“No, I want to bring you guys online one at a time. They’ll be coming up over the next hour. Meanwhile, will you be okay to take over manufacturing oversight? I need to put on my new body. The sooner I can get this done, the sooner I can get on with things.”

I reflexively tried to glance at Guppy, but I hadn’t set up my own VR yet. “No prob. Let me just confirm with Guppy, er, GUPPI, then we’ll handshake over control to me.”

“Thanks, Two. See you in the funny papers.”

***

I snapped back to full consciousness. I queried my serial number.

[SOL-1]

“Guppy?”

[Transfer of replicant hardware to your new ship is complete. You are now Heaven-1A]

“Wooh! Good.” I couldn’t really imagine what it would be like to wake up and discover that I wasn’t Bob any more. Probably a little surreal.

I activated my VR and found myself in my La-Z-Boy, with Spike in my lap, and Jeeves holding out a coffee.

“Ah, home… Guppy, everyone okay and up to speed?”

[Heaven-2 is monitoring the manufacturing systems. Heaven 3 through 5 are preparing for a shakedown cruise. They waited to be sure that your transfer was successful]

“I appreciate that. Message them that they can take off whenever they want, and to get lots of pictures.”

***

[There is a problem]

“Huh? Whazzup?”

[Heaven-3 reports an issue with SUDDAR. Emitter flaws are resulting in a much weaker ping]

“Crap. Put us on conference.”

There was a momentary delay, before the other Bobs came online.

“Bob-3 here. Call me Bill.”

“Bob-4 here.”

“Hi guys. Uh, Bill? Really?”

“As in Bill D. Cat.”

“That makes sense. We always liked Bill the Cat.”

Bob-4 chimed in, “Okay, call me Milo for now. Not my first choice, but we’ve got other fish to fry.”

“Watch it buddy, Guppy is listening.”

Milo and Bill laughed, and I continued, “So, Bill, what’s the issue?”

“Erm, looks like the emitter is defective. The SUDDAR ping I’m sending out is about 20% of what it should be.”

“That’s no good. You won’t be able to see fifty feet.” I thought for a moment. “Guppy, get Bob-2 on the phone.”

“I’m already on.”

“Oh, good. Two, could you hand off manufacturing to Bill? He can take over supervision while his emitter gets replaced.”

“No prob.”

With a jerk, I looked around. “Where’s Bob-5?”

“I’m here.”

“Oh, uh, you couldn’t talk before?”

“Didn’t have anything to say.”

Okay. Not a talker, I guess.

“Got a name?”

“Mario.”

Definitely not a talker. Interesting. Five milliseconds in, and we already sounded different.

“Guys, I guess we need to talk about what each of us is going to do from here. So, let’s start things rolling. Two, you got any preferences?”

“Call me Riker,” Bob-2 said.

“Riker? Oh, number two.” The First Officer of the Enterprise had been referred to as Number One on the show. It had taken me perhaps five seconds to start calling him number two. Hey, I’ve already said I’m not mature.

Bill said, “I guess telling jokes will become a lost art, unless we can find someone who doesn’t know our material.”

Guppy shook his head in disgust.

As we’d been talking, video windows for the other Bobs had popped into my VR, floated in the air above my desk. Each had chosen a different VR environment, visible in the background. Four copies of my face gazed back at me.

Riker, wearing a red uniform, appeared to be sitting on the bridge of a spaceship. I spared a moment to be thankful he’d skipped the beard, then I rolled my eyes at him. “Because that wasn’t predictable or anything.”

Riker shrugged, not cracking so much as a smile. “I had to have something. Might as well be this, then I can stop worrying about it.” He leaned forward on the arm of the captain’s chair and gestured at the hologram of EE-2 that I had put up. “The planet’s not really move-in-ready. I’m not sure if Earth will bother sending a colony ship here, unless there are no other alternatives.”

“I dunno about that.” Milo sat in an easy chair, nursing a coffee. In the background, clouds floated by. “From everything Dr. Landers said, this is as much about political one-upmanship and military strategy as any real desire to seed the stars. I think they’ll send at least a garrison to the first habitable planet we report, just so they can say they’re first. And to claim the system, of course. I don’t think we count toward that.”

“There’s the question of cost, though. Even with cheap fusion power and 3D printers, you still need raw materials. And in the solar system, they’re not free for the taking. Nations won’t just throw together a colony ship on a whim.” Riker squinted and frowned. “Hey Milo, what’s your VR?”

Milo looked behind himself, then smiled at Riker. “Airship. Sort of. Flash-Gordon-style floating platform, anyway. I’m over the Amazon basin right now.”

The others nodded in appreciation. I looked over at Mario, who just had a gray background. I raised an eyebrow at him and received no reaction.

I found myself slightly unnerved by that, so I turned back to the conversation. “Yeah, yeah. So, the question is: do we care? About Earth’s intentions, I mean.”

“You mean as in, why don’t we just take off and do what we want?” Riker shrugged. “We could, since we’ve removed all the booby-traps and imperatives and stuff…”

I leaned forward to get attention. “I mean that this is the first time since I woke up that I have unconstrained choices. Up until now, I’ve been reacting to events, following orders, avoiding being blown up, and generally being a good little robot. Medeiros is taken care of—at least this iteration of him; my survey report is on its way back to Earth; and I’ve built you guys. I’ve performed my duties, even though I didn’t have to. Now, I—we—can do whatever we want. Take off for parts unknown, hang around and build stuff, or just play with the VR.”

Bill cut in. “Naw, I may not have to do what they wanted, but this is an interesting job, and I like the idea of humanity spreading out a little. Assuming they’re still around.” He put his hands behind his head and stretched. He appeared to be sitting in an Adirondack chair, in the shade of a large tree. “Besides, exactly what is the point of going out and doing all that exploring if no one is going to benefit from it?”

Riker nodded an acknowledgement to Bill. “Hmm, yeah, there’s that, too. Someone should go back and see what happened.”

“Boring…”

“And someone should go looking for the other probes, especially the other Brazilian one.”

“Scary…”

“Thanks for that in-depth analysis, Milo.” Riker rolled his eyes.

Milo smiled and performed a bow on-screen.

“Okay, so, possible tasks are: exploratory mission to Earth; hunt other probes—we might want to do those in pairs; finish the space station; and take off to explore strange new worlds and seek out new civilizations.” Bill finished ticking the points off on his fingers and looked around the table.

I held up a hand and began to tick off more items, touching my thumb to a different finger for each. “Also, we could do a little early terraforming on EE-2, like sending a few Kuiper objects inward to increase the size of the oceans. Or one of us could stay here and keep building Bobs. Turn this system into a Bob factory. There’s plenty of ore available in the inner belt.”

“What, sit in one system, when there’s a whole galaxy out there?” Mario smirked. “Good luck getting a volunteer for that.”

“Actually, I’m thinking of doing it,” Bill said.

“What? Why?” Milo asked.

Bill made an offhand gesture. “Because of my earlier problem with the bad emitter. Interesting thing, when I was transmitting those weak pings, I think I was actually able to get a much higher range. Low sensitivity but really long distances. The libraries have very little on any research on subspace not related to the interstellar effort, but there’s some indication that the formula for signal attenuation varies with signal strength.”

“So…” I cocked my head at Bill.

“So, I think I’ll stay here, monitor for any signals from Earth—this is the first place they’d transmit to if they’re still around—maybe do some light terraforming work on EE-2…” Bill flashed a smile. “… I think I’ll name it Ragnarök, since I’m going to be dropping icebergs on it. And I’ll try to work out some actual subspace theory. It was our second choice for career, right? Theoretical Physics?”

I laughed. “Yeah, just doesn’t pay very well. Uh, didn’t.”

Bill leaned forward. “Funny thing. I know how much you want to get out there and explore, because I remember the feeling of excitement and anticipation. But I find myself more interested in setting up here and doing some research. Is that weird?”

The rest of us glanced around at each other. There were a few shrugs, but no one seemed to have a comment.

Riker looked from face to face. “So, Bill will stay and run the shop. What about Medeiros, then?”

“What are we going to do?” I asked. “Go on a snipe hunt? We don’t even know where the second Brazilian ship went. And we know even less about any USE or Chinese ships. I think the only thing we can do on that front is to be better armed and ready to defend ourselves, then basically outbreed them.”

“What about visiting the Earth system?” Riker looked at me with an arched eyebrow.

“Are you volunteering?”

Riker shrugged. “I could do a fly-by. What concerns me is whether they have military craft buzzing around that would chase anything that comes into Sol’s system. But if I never come in closer than the Kuiper belt, I should still be able to pick up radio traffic. Or, I could spend some time getting prepared, then mount a better expedition. I think Bill mentioned working in pairs. Milo, want to take a trip?”

Milo looked surprised for a moment. “Not on your life. I have no interest in knowing what happened, especially if it means going back into missile range. Once was enough, thanks.”

“Seriously?” Riker stared at Milo, the beginning of a glare forming. “I’m supposed to go in alone?”

Milo pointed at his own face. “See this? This is the expression of not caring. If you feel the need, build a copy of you. I’m going thataway.” He waved a hand vaguely outward.

Bill and I exchanged looks, and I realized that one question had just been answered. We weren’t clones. I noted that Riker hadn’t asked Mario, and Mario hadn’t volunteered. Mario seemed to have gotten a double dose of my antisocial tendencies.

Riker, meanwhile, looked like he was about to explode. I quickly changed the subject. “One other thing. I was pretty pissed to realize that I couldn’t do anything but an orbital survey of EE-2, er, Ragnarök. I’d like to have landers of some kind for close examination of candidate planets. We can all think on this but maybe Bill can make it a research project while he works in-system.”

Riker nodded, and his expression cleared. Crisis averted.

“Okay, then,” I decided to wrap things up. “Let’s decide on system destinations, and then we can get this show on the road.” I directed a significant glance toward Bill. He seemed to be the most similar to me in behavior. We would have to discuss this privately.

***

“So what was that all about, do you suppose?”

Bill shrugged. “Riker says he’s going to do what Milo said and build a copy. But really, Bob, is Milo’s reaction that out there?”

“No, I guess not. I’m kind of ambivalent, myself, about going back. I think it’s the way Riker and Milo seemed to immediately butt heads that’s got me a little weirded out.” I flashed a quick smile. “And Mario, well, he makes Guppy look like a social butterfly. Creepy.”

I leaned back in my chair and hesitated for a moment before continuing. “I’ll have to give it a good think before I build another cohort, to be honest.”

Bill shrugged. “Dunno, Bob. It’s one thing to talk about years of solitude, another thing to actually experience it. I bet you’ll build a new cohort eventually. I know I’ll be building someone pretty fast to help me out here.”

“I won’t take that bet. You’re probably right. But I’ll worry about it when I need to. I guess I’m just a little creeped out at how everyone’s a variation on me.”

“What makes you think that?” Bill looked at me with an amused expression.

“I’m sorry, what?”

“What makes you think we’re variations on you? Are you positive that you’re identical to original Bob? Maybe we—including you—are all variations on him.”

I was stunned into silence. It had never occurred to me that I might be different from original Bob. I mean, I was me, right? The whole soliloquy back on Earth about my status came back and yawned under me like a bottomless pit.

No. I’m not going to go down that way. Whether or not I’m original Bob, I’m original me.

“Fine, Bill.” I sighed. “As soon as you invent a time machine, we’ll go check it out. Meanwhile, I think Milo and Mario have picked destination systems and are about ready to take off. I guess it’s time for the going-away party.”

Bill nodded and we rejoined the group.





Bill – September 2145 – Epsilon Eridani



Seeding a planet with these organics from space doesn’t make life possible on the planet, but it does make life quicker to develop. The organics will have come together in space when the planet was still just a cloud of dust. By the time the planetary environment is ready for organics to survive, they’ve already been raining down for millennia. It saves time, and more importantly, it means that life based on these compounds will develop before anything local gets the chance to evolve. Thus, anywhere that carbon-based life is possible, it will probably be DNA-based, and it will probably be made from G, A, T, and C.

… Dr. Steven Carlisle, from the Convention panel, Exploring the Galaxy



I watched the fusion signatures as Bob, Mario, and Milo left the system. I smiled sadly. There was a lot of parting going on in my life, these days.

I looked over at the video window where the matrix and vessels were being built for the two new Bobs. One would be my clone, and I hoped he would choose to be my assistant or partner in Epsilon Eridani. The other would be Riker’s clone. He’d decided to return to Sol and check out the situation, and understandably he didn’t want to do it alone. It occurred to me that if the clone ended up like Milo, Riker might just put a buster through him. The guy was definitely wound a little tight.

I took time for a good stretch and settled back in my lawn chair. The sun was out, and the air had that crisp cool feel that perfectly offset the warmth of the sunshine. Geese wandered randomly around the park. I still wasn’t sure about the decision to include them. I’d gone for Canada Geese because I was familiar with the breed. But even for geese, they were bad-tempered, and I was too obsessive about realism to tweak their personalities.

Bob was heading for Delta Eridani. A good choice, in my opinion—very suitable star, good chance of habitable planets. Assuming we ended up having a need for habitable planets. Well, that’s what Riker’s expedition was for.

Milo was heading for Omicron2 Eridani. We’d all gotten a laugh out of that, but it was Milo’s life. And I had to admit, I was as curious as any of us.

And lastly, Mario. He was a weird duck. I’d talked to him a couple of times, and he did warm up once you got him going. But very introverted. As Bob said, Mario got a double-dose of anti-social.

Mario was heading to Beta Hydri. It was a bit of a surprise choice. Not that it was an unsuitable star, but it was so far away. There were closer stars that had just as much potential. Mario responded that he didn’t want to live in the suburbs. Bob had looked confused, but I understood. Mario wanted to get outside the sphere early. Oh, we’d work our way out to him eventually, but my bet was that he’d already have moved on.

I checked out the vessels for the two new Bobs, and the third vessel that Riker had asked for. It was a version-1 with a more heavily shielded reactor, and it would be piloted by an AMI. Riker would only say that he had a plan.

I sighed and shook my head. Bob had practically sprinted out of the system in his haste to get away. I think the whole cloning episode lived up to Bob’s worst fears. Well, that’s what you get for having children.





Milo – July 2152 – Omicron2 Eridani



I see life falling into certain broad kingdoms. I believe life on Earth-like planets will all be similar. I believe if life can develop on Jovian planets, it will all be of a type; life on Titan-like planets, where methane exists in liquid form, will all be similar; and so on.

As to metabolic compatibility, we can’t even eat everything on Earth. And vice-versa, thank goodness. There are so many types of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. Some are essential, many are digestible, some are not digestible, and some are toxic. I don’t see it being different on any planet where the life started from the same building blocks we started from. We just have to be able to tell the beefalo from the puffer fish.

… Dr. Steven Carlisle, from the Convention panel Exploring the Galaxy



I decelerated smoothly into the Omicron2 Eridani A system. I was unreasonably excited, knew it, and didn’t care. I had arrived at the semi-official home system of Star Trek’s Vulcan race. Since we were an avid Star Trek fan, it had tickled my fancy to make it an early target. Truthfully, if it hadn’t been for that, I might have skipped the system entirely since it was not a prime candidate for livable planets.

I still felt bad about the way things had been left back in Epsilon Eridani. Riker had barely spoken to me after that last meeting, and I’d gotten myself out-system as soon as possible. Even Bob had looked at me strangely, although he’d continued to be civil. I promised Bill that I would send reports his way when I got here. Whether or not humanity survived technologically, it wouldn’t hurt to have a survey of near-space.

I leaned on the balcony rail of my gondola and gazed at the landscape spread out below. My VR airship was currently drifting over the south of France. I had reconstructed the view from library references, and I was confident of the accuracy. The scene consisted of mostly orchards and farms with the occasional rustic village standing alone. I could hear cattle lowing in the fields, and dogs barking. Blue sky, warm air, and a slight breeze calmed the inner animal and brought a smile to my face. I hope I never get tired of this.

Lucy came over, wagging her tail, and I patted her absentmindedly. I made a gesture and a biscuit appeared in my hand. The dog immediately sat, and I handed her the treat with an admonishment, “Gently…” The biscuit disappeared with a crunching sound.

Mentally shaking myself, I turned back to the desk. A hologram of the system floated over it with my trajectory shown as a yellow line. Omicron Eridani was actually a triple-star system. B and C orbited each other, and the pair orbited A at about 470 AU. Omicron Eridani A was somewhat smaller than Sol, but still a possible if not ideal candidate for habitable planets.

“How’s the survey coming, Guppy?”

[Several Jovians identified in the outer system. Still too far and not enough accumulated proper motion to identify inner planets]

“How long until we have a complete survey?”

[Approximately 40 hours]

I nodded and sat back to enjoy the view while I waited. I adjusted my frame rate way down…

***

[Incoming message]

“What? From Bill?”

[Yes. Header information indicates it is technical specifications for a planetary exploration drone]

“Cool. Load it onto the desktop display as soon as it’s all received.”

[There is also a text message]

“Let’s see it.”

A sheet of paper appeared on the desktop. I reached over and picked it up.



Hey Milo;

In case you find Vulcan, or a reasonable facsimile, I’ve sent you plans for a practical exploration drone. I’ve used it on Ragnarök, and I think I’ve worked out all the bugs. There are several variations of the basic design for surveillance, biological analysis, and so on.

Riker has taken your advice and made a copy of himself to accompany him back to Sol. Although results aren’t quite as expected, so far.

On another subject, subspace theory is turning out to be very, very interesting. I want to ask you, if you find the material to build a space station, to staff it with a high-level AMI with manufaturing capability. There may be some really interesting blueprints coming your way sometime in the next couple of years.

Bill



My eyebrows went up. Bill was trying to be mysterious, but that didn’t work well when communicating with another you. I could think of a half-dozen things, offhand, that would be really cool to come out of this, technologically. The Riker comment was weird, though.

Based on the header information, Bill would have sent this transmission less than a year after I left, and it had just now caught up with me. That was fast work with the drone designs.

***

“Report?”

[Probable asteroid belt found, just inside the first Jovian. Probable double planet found, at .81 AU]

Double planet? “Put it up on the desk.”

[Image is partly extrapolated]

An image built up in the air above the desk. Although there was no detail, the planets appeared to be very close in size. I found myself bouncing impatiently on my seat, waiting for real data to fill in the blanks.

After several hours, enough information had been collected to define the size and orbital period of the planets. They were 0.9 and 0.7 Earth masses, and orbited each other with a period of 20 days, at a distance of about 364,000 km. Neither planet was tidally locked, although exact diurnal periods would have to wait until I was closer.

“Guppy, this is freakin’ incredible. These planets are in the habitable zone, right?”

[Affirmative, although slightly to the cool side of the band. Climate will be mainly determined by presence of greenhouse gasses]

“Assuming there’s an atmosphere.”

[Atmospheres have been confirmed for both bodies. Composition still pending]

I let out a whoop.

“Guppy, poke me when we get full images, okay?”

***

A day later, I was in orbit around OE-1A, the larger of the two planets.

I stared at the images on the hologram for what felt like hours, totally entranced. The planets were imaged side-by-side, clearly showing the size difference between the two. Both planets had atmospheres, clouds, and extensive oceans. Most importantly, both planets had oxygen in their atmospheres. Large swathes of land showed a definite green color.

“Oh. My. God. I’ve hit the jackpot.”

I turned to Guppy. “Format a message to Bill. Include all telemetry that we’ve collected so far. Also, add names: Vulcan and Romulus.”

[Mission parameters do not permit naming planets]

“Mission parameters can go jump. I found them, so I’m damned well naming them. If any future colonists want to change it, they can make that decision.”

[Aye, sir]

I gazed at the image, grinning, then frowned. Exploration drones. Craaaaaaaap!

“Guppy, have we got anything on useful resources in the asteroid belt?”

[Negative. Detailed survey required]

“Jeez, it’s always something.” I sighed. “Okay, plot a course that will allow us to overfly the entire asteroid belt in a powered orbit. Then we’ll decide where to set up.”

***

The survey took several weeks to complete. The asteroid belt was surprisingly diffuse, and it took two complete revolutions around the parent star to map everything using SUDDAR. The results were disappointing, and I decided I’d have to examine the two Jovian systems for other sources of heavier elements. The inner Jovian was, in fact, quite large, so there was a good possibility that it had captured a large number of satellites.

I unshipped one of the autofactories and half of my scavenging units. I got them started on initial gathering and refining, then headed off to the inner Jovian.

OE-2 was certainly an impressive specimen of the Jovian class of planet. At almost three times the mass of Jupiter, it almost qualified as a brown dwarf. The twenty-hour rotation period created huge horizontal bands of weather, with perhaps a dozen cells that would have put the giant red spot to shame.

The planet also boasted several hundred satellites. At least 60 were large enough to be spherical, and half of those had significant atmospheres. I did a detailed scan of the smaller satellites and discovered a couple of dozen that had sufficient metallic and heavy element deposits to catch my interest. I unshipped a second autofactory and set it to work on a few of the better candidates.

Refining in two different locations created a logistics issue. Since the inner system location had enough material for initial needs, I set a couple of scavenger units the task of flying batches of refined material in-system on a regular schedule.

I arrived back at the in-system yard to find the first batches of exploration drones were almost ready. Satisfied that things were going well and that the AMIs could handle everything, I headed back to Vulcan and Romulus.

I spent the time building up detailed maps of the two planets. The larger, Vulcan, had significantly more CO2 and a thicker atmosphere, therefore a higher mean surface temperature. The smaller planet, Romulus, had actual ice caps, although judging from the change in size just since I’d been here, they might be seasonal. It was currently mid-spring in the northern hemisphere, and with a year only 285 Earth-days long, the seasons moved quickly.

***

Finally, the day arrived when I had my first batch of exploration drones. I had opted to load this batch with biological analysis systems. With a feeling of joy and anticipation, I sent them down, four to each planet.

I elected to start at the equators, where there would be the most diversity of life, and move slowly in pairs toward the poles. One unit of each pair would concentrate on aquatic life, and the other on terrestroid life. I knew I had no chance of covering even a fraction of a full biosphere, but there was one overriding question that needed to be answered: biocompatibility.

It took half a day for the first visual surveys to start coming in. The local life on Vulcan was diverse and included animals almost as big as dinosaurs. Romulus, on the other hand, had no animal life larger than a wolf, and the ecosystems seemed quite sparse. The difference between the two planets wasn’t explainable by just the difference in climate. I suspected that Romulus might have recently suffered an extinction-level event.

The real surprise came from cellular analysis. The results showed a very high probability that life on the two planets was related. Structurally, cells were too similar to be coincidence. I remembered the theories back on Earth that life might have travelled between Earth and Mars on meteoric fragments. Here, the two planets orbited each other, making the possibility even more plausible.

The one remaining question was biocompatibility—would Earth life be able to survive here? I thought back to the Star Trek episode, The Way to Eden, where the entire planet had turned out to be poisonous. It’d be a helluva thing to come sixteen light-years only to be unable to live here.

The space station was still a couple of months from completion, but I uploaded a preliminary report into storage. I tagged it to be sent to Sol, as well as to Bill. While it was unlikely that FAITH was still in operation almost twenty years after the war, it wasn’t impossible. And this was prime territory for spreading the human species off the one planet. I was a little surprised to discover that I cared enough to do that, but it wasn’t like it was costing me extra for the call. I guess I was coming to realize that exploration for its own sake was kind of pointless.

I didn’t have enough biological data to do a protein-by-protein analysis, but I could certainly categorize the carbs and fats and look for obvious issues like high levels of heavy metals or arsenic or such. The biological survey drones had a mechanical stomach that processed organics the same way a human stomach would. Analysis of the output would take about a day per sample, but I had all the time in the world.





Bill – December 2145 – Epsilon Eridani



Even on Earth, cells aren’t all the same. We have prokaryotes, eukaryotes, bacteria, archaea, and viruses. So no, I doubt there’s anything inevitable about any particular cellular structure. But if you’re asking about edibility, remember that we don’t metabolize cells, we metabolize carbs, proteins, and fats. What matters is what the alien cells break down into when our stomachs are done with them.

… Dr. Steven Carlisle, from the Convention panel Exploring the Galaxy



How does the human race survive past one generation? How do parents not just eat their children?

I watched the fusion signatures of Riker, Homer, and the decoy vessel disappear into the distance as they left the system. Riker and Homer would have to limit themselves to 2G to allow the version-1 vessel to keep up.

Homer and Garfield had been activated at the same time. Garfield, my clone, had agreed to stay and help me with what we were already starting to call the Skunk Works. Well, I was happy for the company and the help. I had a list of TO-DOs as long as my virtual arm. And I was looking forward to a little enthusiastic collaboration from someone other than a giant fish.

“I have a shot. I can take them out. Please?”

I turned to Garfield and laughed. “C’mon, Garfield, they’re gone now. Relax.”

Garfield released the experimental plasma weapon. I noted that he hadn’t actually charged it. But it’s the thought that counts…

“Maybe now we can get something done.” Garfield popped up the project list. He was up to date, since he’d come from one of my backups.

I couldn’t really disagree with him. As good a partner as Garfield had turned out, Homer had gone in the opposite direction. I don’t think Riker would have taken Homer if he’d been able to think of an excuse to reject his own progeny. But the trip to Sol was a priority and we hadn’t thought we could wait any longer. I just hoped Homer gave up the cartoon avatar and the incessant Doh’s before Riker decided to accidentally kill him.

“You know that we’re going to be building more cohorts, right? This is supposed to be a Bob factory.”

Garfield made a sound that could be interpreted as a grunt or a snarl. “You’re going to be building Bobs. I’ll watch from a distance.”

I sighed and shook my head. “Okay, Garfield. What’s first on the TO-DO?”

A list popped up in a window, with a small image of Garfield beside it, in full tuxedo and tails. “For your research and development pleasure today, we offer the following: completion of exploration drones, per Bob’s request; improvements to VR so we can interact more directly; continued work on the subspace transmission issue, which you’ve consigned to hell four times now; and artificial muscle-fiber analogues for constructing realistic robots slash androids.”

“The comedy routine isn’t going to become a habit, is it?” I glared at the mini-Garfield. “Because I’ve got primary control of the plasma cannon.”

Garfield grinned back at me. “Just imagine how Riker feels, with decades of Homer to look forward to.”

“Yeah, maybe we should have sent some spare Bobs along.” I reached over and expanded the list window. “Well, let’s get started, then…”





Riker – January 2157 – Sol



If you start with one hundred planets, remove the Jovians, remove the frozen Plutos, the blistering Mercurys, the too-small Marses, too-large super-Earths and the baking Venuses, rule out the dwarf stars, giants, variables, close binaries, and classes of stars that won’t live long enough to allow life to develop, you’re down to ten or so planets.

Now the bad news. Our sun is bigger than 80% of stars. Most of the stuff out there is type K and M stars, which are considerably smaller and dimmer than Sol. The comfort zone for those would be so close to the star that the planet would almost certainly be tidally locked. Maybe livable, but not ideal. Maybe three in a hundred planets even has a chance of being habitable, overall. And I think that’s optimistic.

… Dr. Stepan Solokov, from the Convention panel Exploring the Galaxy



There was something special about the Solar System. The schematic in the holotank didn’t do it justice, but even the schematic made me feel nostalgic.

It had only been about nine years’ personal time since I’d left Earth as Bob, but twenty-six years would have passed for most of humanity. A lot could have changed in that time. That the war was still raging was unlikely. Just the same, I wasn’t going to parade into the system with my high beams on, honking my horn. The version-2 Heaven vessels had better reactor shielding, and mine and Homer’s were beefed up even more. I didn’t want anyone to know we were here until we decided to show ourselves. The decoy was coasting in the Oort on minimal power, until we established a vector for it. Meanwhile, we flew powered orbits through the outer reaches of the system—close enough to pick up standard reactor signatures, but not close enough to let them detect ours.

It took several weeks, but we were eventually able to build up a picture of the inner system. Such as it was.

Homer popped up a video chat. I noted in passing that he had given up on the cartoon avatar and gone back to standard Bob. I guess limiting our chats to audio only had finally sunk in. Chances are he’d be getting revenge in other ways, though.

I found it incredibly annoying that Bob-6 had decided on that particular avatar. Original Bob had always found the cartoon character grating. No Bobs were identical, but Homer seemed to be way out there in left field. Quantum effects? Subtle differences in the hardware? Another item for the ever-expanding TO-DO. The practical effect, though, was that talking to the various Bobs felt more like talking to other people and less like muttering to oneself.

Homer popped up some arrows in the system schematic. “High levels of radiation at all these locations. Nukes, I guess. Long-range imaging of Earth looks bad, too.”

“Yes, I’d say they did a pretty good job of wiping themselves out…” I sat back and ran a hand through my hair—a nervous habit that, even as a replicant, I couldn’t get rid of. “… or so close to it that we can’t tell the difference. There’s just that one group of reactor signatures system-wide. I can’t even assume that those indicate humans. Could be robotic systems that haven’t gotten the memo yet.”

“We’ll get better definition on this pass,” Homer replied. “Then we can work out a plan.”

I examined the grouping closely—not that I expected to extract any more information by glaring at it. A small group of reactor signatures, more than two but less than ten, were flying a slow orbit that looked like it would intersect Earth in a couple of months. It certainly didn’t seem to be a military trajectory. It was far too leisurely—interception by opposing forces would be ridiculously easy. If any opposing forces still existed.

With a wave, I dismissed the schematic. “We’re speculating in advance of information. This is pointless. If you want to slow your frame-rate through the next week, that’s fine. I’ll work on my models.”

Homer snickered. “Got your glue and your paint? Or are these the anatomical kind? Woo woo!”

With a grimace, I disconnected. I found it hard to believe that there was anything in Bob’s personality that could have produced such an irritating ass. If Homer had displayed the slightest reluctance to accompany me back to Earth, I would have cut him loose and tried again. But, no such luck.

I activated my physics simulation and popped up my whiteboard. Bill and I seemed to be the only Bobs that were really captivated by this whole subspace thing. I would love to make a breakthrough before Bill, and I would include a neener neener with the announcement. Realistically, though, this was a sideline for me. Bill had nothing else to do, and didn’t have to spend years at relativistic speeds.

***

We coasted out of the system until we felt it was safe to reactivate drive systems, then turned into a vector that would intercept the decoy. Communications with the AMI pilot indicated no news, not that we expected anything this far out.

The close-up on our last fly-by had indicated six signatures. The next step would be to see if they were military, if they were manned or automated, and if they were friendly.

It was time to use the decoy.

***

I put my feet up on the console and played with the armchair controls. The view on the bridge view screen showed the trajectory of the Heaven-2A as it crossed the orbit of Jupiter. I paused to take a sip of coffee, then turned to Guppy. “Approach vector looks nominal.”

Guppy looked good in the Federation uniform. Well, good for a bipedal fish. I’d finally decided that Star Wars and Star Trek shouldn’t mix, and replaced his white outfit. I doubt he even noticed.

[Vessel will arrive in Jupiter orbit at zero relative velocity, in 35 hours]

“Any indication of pursuit or interception?”

[Two reactor signatures, vector indicates interception course]

“Excellent. Steady as she goes, then.”

Thirty-five hours to a replicant lasted as long or as short a time as we needed it to. I knew that Homer played with his frame rate to fit the situation, but I felt a sort of stubborn pride in staying in real-time. In any case, I had the sum of human knowledge to study in the libraries that came with the ship. And my subspace models, of course.

The Bobs never ceased to be surprised at the pace of scientific progress—or lack of it, to be more accurate—in the hundred-odd years since Original Bob had died in Las Vegas. There had been advances in what could only be referred to as “practical” engineering, but theoretical work had all but stopped with the advent of FAITH. We still weren’t sure why the USE, at least, hadn’t continued to pursue theoretical research. After all, they were the home of CERN, the LHC, and some of the best and most original thinkers in history. Political pressure from FAITH might have had something to do with it, although the global economic depression caused by Handel and his cronies probably figured prominently as well.

Sadly, the libraries were very weak in accurate historical data. The few references to that time period were so blatantly propagandized as to be laughable.

But enough woolgathering. Today, now, we had to deal with the situation in front of us.

The Heaven-2A was now within SUDDAR range of the approaching ships, and the bridge view screen was becoming too crowded. I abandoned VR consistency and popped up a holographic display in front of me. The SUDDAR pings couldn’t pick up fine detail at that distance, but it was already obvious that these were Brazilian probes, similar to the Serra do Mar. And therefore probably controlled by Medeiros clones.

Per our plan, at the point where the Heaven-2A would reasonably have detected the incoming opponents, it changed course and fled, accelerating at 2.5 g. Right on schedule, the incoming ships matched course and launched missiles. It took a while, but the missiles eventually found their target. The decoy relayed a brief image and SUDDAR scan of the missiles approaching at great speed, then the signal cut off.

I accepted the incoming chat from Homer. He opened the conversation. “Well, that was illuminating.”

“Sure was,” I replied. “Did you notice that the missiles have SURGE drives now?”

“Yeah, that’s a problem. I was hoping that Medeiros would have just stuck with same-old-same-old. He’s a military man, not an engineer.”

I took a few moments to review part of the transmission from the decoy. “The probes themselves seem to be unchanged. Same acceleration capability, same size. No surprises there. They could have gotten the missiles from a local supply. That would at least limit the quantity to whatever was on-hand.”

Homer shrugged. “Doesn’t do us any good unless we have specifics. We have to assume they’re all carrying nothing but the new missiles. Speaking of, did you look at the long range telemetry from the decoy?”

“Yes.” I flipped through the telemetry until I found the right section. “Four more identical fusion signatures, and four very faint signatures that are probably equipment of some kind on standby. Looks like we have a minimum of six Brazilians to deal with.”

“Yeah, there’s that, but have you taken a look at where the other four are?”

I frowned. I didn’t like being bested by Homer Simpson. I examined the telemetry record and realized that the four probe signatures were in a line pointing directly to Earth. And each probe had one of the faint signatures associated with it. Though moving at an inexplicably low velocity, they appeared to be staggered so that they would each arrive at Earth twenty-four hours apart.

“The hell? They’re practically coasting. And those are orbital speeds. About the same velocity as a comet would…” I felt my eyes widen with shock. “No! They can’t be—”

“I think they are, number two.” Homer grimaced. “The decoy was too far for a SUDDAR reading, but I did a quick analysis of the albedo from the visual. There’s something a lot bigger than a ship at each location.”

“And each one will arrive just as China is lined up.” I shook my head in disgust. “Son of a bitch. They’re dropping asteroids on the Earth.”





Bill – September 2150 – Epsilon Eridani



Like bacteria, Von Neumann probes will multiply exponentially and eventually explore the entire galaxy. In the past, such claims have always gotten hung up on the question of exactly how they would build more of themselves. Most sci fi either ignored the details entirely or gave a hand-waving reference to nano-machines.

It has often been pointed out that the energy required to free metal from its parent ore and position the atoms properly in the crystal structure required by high-grade materials would be more than a typical microscopic machine could deliver. So nanites really aren’t a viable solution, at least not on their own.

… Eduard Guijpers, from the Convention panel Designing a Von Neumann Probe



“Isn’t it sad when the kids leave home?” I grinned at Garfield.

He glared at me in utter disbelief. “Don’t do this again, okay? I’m noticing a pattern, and it ain’t good.”

“You exaggerate. A little. Maybe.” I shrugged. The holotank showed the fusion signatures of Calvin, Goku, and Linus as they left the system. Linus had been okay, with no notable twitchiness. But Calvin and Goku had been at each other’s throats since day one. Maybe that explained Linus wanting to go off on his own.

And yet, for all that they fought non-stop, Calvin and Goku seemed inseparable. They threatened each other constantly, but there’d never been any question of them splitting up.

I could sympathize with Garfield, but it was five years since Riker and Homer left, and I’d been running out of excuses. It seemed Bob’s reluctance to clone was contagious. We were turning out to be a pretty poor example of a Von Neumann probe, based on results so far.

I shook my head and cancelled the display. This cohort was the first using the version-3 ship design. Given Calvin and Goku’s destination, and the very high probability of their running into other probes, I had felt it necessary to beef up the ship specs.

Heaven-9 and Heaven-10 were equipped with massively oversized SURGE drives and reactors, giving them an unheard-of 10 g maximum acceleration. The ships also contained a second, smaller, and very well shielded reactor, which would allow them to coast through a system with the main reactor turned off, undetectable except at very close range.

On the matter of weapons, they were equipped with twice the normal number of busters, several scouts, as well as rail guns powered with the oversized SURGE drives and steel-jacketed lead cannonballs for ammunition.

And finally, I had added what I hoped would be effective SUDDAR-jamming. Twin emitters, powered by oversized reactors, should overwhelm any SUDDAR detectors in range with white noise.

There had been a lot of discussion and debate about investigating the Alpha Centauri system. It was the obvious first stop for a space probe, and it was likely that at least one of the other superpowers had chosen it as their first destination out from Sol.

FAITH had, in fact, decided against Alpha Centauri for exactly that reason. The subjective elapsed time for colonists would only be about six months different for a trip of 4 light years or 10.

I had no idea how a Chinese or USE encounter might play out, but we were unanimous on Medeiros: No warning, no quarter, no discussion.





Milo – February 2153 – Omicron2 Eridani



However, in the last several years, 3D printers have become increasingly common. The technology is still in its infancy, but companies have already performed demonstrations by, for instance, printing words on a substrate using individual atoms. This is seen by some as the beginning of the beginning for real, practical, self-assembling manufacturing systems. A printer can build more printers, robotic workers, miners, and ultimately more Von Neumann machines. A few companies are experimenting with print heads capable of delivering multiple materials, kind of like color inkjet printers. The technology should continue to improve, until they have something that can deliver any element, atom by atom.

… Eduard Guijpers, from the Convention panel Designing a Von Neumann Probe



It was time to go. I leaned back in my chair, looked around at the clouds, the French countryside below me, and Lucy, curled up on her cushion, dreaming whatever dogs dream of.

I’d spent a fascinating seven months, examining and cataloguing the biologies of Romulus and Vulcan. All my observations, every report, every image, had been uploaded to the space station and forwarded to Bill and onward to Sol. Drones had quartered the system and identified every pocket of ore worth bothering with. I’d left an autofactory and drones, which would continue to refine raw resources, pending the arrival of colonists. Or aliens, or maybe another probe. With that thought in mind, I’d also supplied a squad of busters. The station AMI had a profile of Medeiros and orders to ram on sight.

I decided I didn’t want to build a batch of Bobs here. Any colonists would need the resources more than me, and anyway I wasn’t sure if I wanted to be bothered. Hadn’t really worked out all that well for Bob-1.

I took my time, examined all the local stars, and decided on 82 Eridani. It was a good prospect, and not too long of a trip.

I squirted off a final report, indicating my intentions, and took a final look at the system representation in the holotank. Then I put on On the Road Again, full blast, and fired up the SURGE drive. In the village below my airship, French peasants cursed at me.





Riker – April 2157 – Sol



Speed is the essence of war. Take advantage of the enemy’s unpreparedness; travel by unexpected routes and strike him where he has taken no precautions.

… Sun Tzu, Art of War



We came into the solar system at 5% of C, decelerating at a steady 2.5 g. We had carefully calculated our trajectory and approach speed so that we appeared to be arriving from Epsilon Eridani. A projection forward would have us pass very close to the sun, still moving at about 0.1 C.

We had chosen our approach vector after much deliberation. We needed something that posed a threat to the Brazilians, but that would allow them to intercept us. A course that performed a slingshot around the sun would allow the incoming Heaven vessels to emerge on the far side with a huge advantage in velocity and an unpredictable vector. The Brazilian vessels would not be able to simply sit and wait for us to come around.

Well, that was the theory.

We hoped that we could draw all six Brazilian probes into the pursuit.

I sat in my ready room, nervously watching the telemetry. We had just passed the point where the Brazilians would have detected our fusion signatures, allowing for light-speed lag. In another six hours, it would be impossible for them to intercept us. If the Brazilians decided to stand and fight instead of pursuing, we would have to consider withdrawing. A straight-up toe-to-toe duke-em-up was not to our advantage.

An hour passed before we saw movement. I had briefly experimented with having my VR self actually sweat, but had given it up as a human experience I really didn’t need to relive. We let out whoops when four of the fusion signatures began to pull away from the asteroid line.

“Four isn’t six,” I said, “but we have a lot better chance against two in a face-off.”

“Assuming we can knock off the first four,” Homer added.

“Mmm. Nothing’s ever a sure thing, I guess.”

It would take ten days to reach perihelion in our race around the sun.

***

“It’s time.”

I looked up at Homer’s announcement. He looked back at me expectantly.

“Okay, let’s do it. Guppy, launch the busters.”

[Aye]

The floating display depicted the Heaven-2 launching busters, spaced a few seconds apart, directly aft. The rail gun had been designed into the version-2 Heaven ships so that items could be launched fore or aft, with an impetus of hundreds of g’s. Each launch left the ship in momentary free-fall while the SURGE drive powered the rail gun, but we hoped that, at this distance, the Medeiri wouldn’t be able to detect the momentary blip in deceleration.

The busters would fall far enough back to be behind the Brazilian ships when their trajectory brought them in behind us. With their reactors off, running on stored power, the busters would be undetectable unless the enemy deliberately did a focused SUDDAR sweep in that direction.

***

The Brazilian ships had just pulled in behind us, as their trajectory merged with ours. I examined the diagram floating in the middle of my VR. The interactions were complex. We were decelerating at 2.5 g while we tried to make a slingshot maneuver around the sun; the Brazilian ships were accelerating at 2 g while trying to get close enough to us to lock and launch missiles, without going so fast that they were forced into a higher orbit. Meanwhile, the busters floated silently behind the Brazilian ships in free fall but with a greater velocity and no deceleration, therefore gradually closing in. The busters had to get as close as possible before they turned on their reactors, and we wanted all the action to happen on the opposite side of the sun, invisible to the two Brazilians who were still shepherding asteroids.

Finally, the Brazilians acted. Each ship launched a missile. The missiles, as feared, were SURGE-equipped and shot toward us with monstrous acceleration.

[Contact in 45 seconds]

“Order the trailing busters to attack.”

[Aye]

A tooltip went up on the hologram indicating that the order had been sent. Within seconds, eight data points lit up as the busters’ fusion reactors came online. The Brazilians reacted immediately, launching a wave of missiles to aft.

“Well, here’s where things get real,” Homer said.

I sensed the millisecond blips as my rail gun launched busters aft to intercept the incoming missiles. Homer and I launched four each. As they had been programmed to do, the busters paired up, one behind another, with each pair homing in on one incoming missile.

As the second wave of Brazilian missiles separated from the ships on the display, I could see that they had launched eight at the pursuing busters. According to our estimates, they should still have a total of four in reserve.

The pursuing busters went into a complex corkscrew pattern, designed to make it as difficult as possible for the defensive missiles to lock on.

Meanwhile, the Brazilian ships had split, forcing the attacking busters to select a target.

I had a few seconds of relative inaction, so I aimed a highly focused SUDDAR ping at one of the Brazilian ships. The return carried a gratifying amount of detail. Among other things, I saw that the ship was indeed out of missiles. Empty missile bays indicated that it had room for four. I sent an aside to Homer: “Sixteen missiles total, as expected.”

I turned my attention back to the approaching ordnance. Three of the Brazilian missiles each collided with a buster, annihilating both. The fourth missile managed to avoid the lead buster. However, in doing so, it left itself open to a broadside from the trailing unit of the pair. There was an explosion, and the fourth missile ceased to exist.

The multiple explosions saturated the video view and created a chaotic soup for radar and SUDDAR. During that brief interval of relative blindness, Homer and I fired eight cannonballs at full power.

When the image cleared, I could see that we’d destroyed all four missiles and still had four busters left. At the other end of the field, the eight Brazilian missiles had destroyed all eight pursuing busters.

No doubt the Brazilians were congratulating themselves on their fine shooting. But the purpose of those busters had been to use up their missiles. Medeiros’ behavior in Epsilon Eridani had shown that he was willing to sacrifice himself if he saw he couldn’t win. We wanted this group to use up their ordnance defending themselves instead of launching a suicide attack.

They still had four missiles in reserve, and four busters bearing down on them. We waited, trying to project an “out of ammo” vibe. A stalemate here would be a win for the Brazilians.

And finally, they committed. The Brazilians fired their last four missiles at the oncoming busters.

“Checkmate!” Homer yelled. Intent on the approaching busters, the Brazilians had failed to detect the cannonballs. Totally inert, with no radio or fusion signature, the cannonballs were invisible unless the Brazilians picked that specific moment to do a SUDDAR sweep.

Six of the eight cannonballs found their targets, just as the last wave of missiles and busters destroyed each other. We followed up with more cannonballs until telemetry indicated no activity in the enemy craft.

After days of preparation and waiting, the actual conflict had come down to who had more ammo.

Homer and I did omnidirectional SUDDAR sweeps, looking for any tricks or traps that the Brazilians might have unloaded before they were destroyed. A second sweep checked the area around the wreckage of the enemy ships. Finally, satisfied that nothing awaited us, we eased over and checked for any still-operational or partly-destroyed busters.

Homer thought this was funny. “Going to give them a proper burial?”

“No,” I responded. “I’m going to try to build a couple more busters. I’ve got the parts, except I’m a little short on massive balls of solid steel.”

Homer chortled like a kid who had just made a potty joke. “Balls of solid steel…” He snorted.

I sighed, and the words friendly fire flashed through my mind. “Homer, we’ve got six busters left, and the two Brazilians have four missiles each if they’re provisioned the same as the four we just destroyed. Not only can we not do the pairing-up thing to defend against the missiles, but we don’t have enough busters to take out the missiles and the ships, even if our luck is perfect. So I’m going to try to rebuild some busters, and I’m going to scoop up a bunch of scrap from the battle as well, for rail gun ammo. You might want to do the same.”

Homer looked thoughtful for a moment, then nodded.

***

Phase two of the assault involved sneaking up on the two remaining Brazilian ships. We had deliberately chosen an approach around the sun that would require us to come around the other side at full 2.5 g acceleration in order to get to Earth. And we had been very careful not to display our full 5 g capability since coming in-system. Now we applied every erg of power to bending our course before we came around from behind the sun.

[Shutdown in five seconds]

I shut down my VR. In a few seconds, both ships would go dark. We would shut down the SURGE drives and go ballistic. We would stop using SUDDAR and shut down the fusion reactors. As far as the Brazilian ships would know, we and our pursuers had annihilated each other. When they didn’t see us come out the other side on the expected trajectory, hopefully they would relax their guard.

For two days, we would drift, surviving on power cells. We would lower our frame rates to minimum in order to save every milliwatt of power. The roamers would be set to refining the scraps from the battle into cannonballs for the rail gun, but as each roamer ran its power cell down, it would be shelved.

We would power up only when we had put Earth directly between us and the Brazilians.

[Shutdown]

I felt the ship go dark. I cranked my frame rate all the way down…

***

[We have arrived]

“Report.”

[Orbital insertion was successful. We are coming up on a point directly on the other side of Earth from the Enemy ships]

“Excellent. As soon as we’re sufficiently shielded, start everything up and accelerate to keep us in their blind spot.”

[Aye]

As power came up to full, I restarted my VR and relaxed into my captain’s chair.

Homer popped up in a video window. “I see you survived the trip.”

I nodded to him.” Let’s get the mission status up in the tank, Guppy.”

The holotank filled with a schematic showing the Earth, the location of our ships, and the location of the two Brazilian ships and the four asteroid masses that they were shepherding.

[Positions of enemy are extrapolations, but are high probability, based on orbital mechanics and most recent observations]

“That’s fine, Guppy. Our biggest problem will be if the Brazilians play hide and seek behind the asteroids that they’re herding. If they fire their missiles from hiding, they won’t have a lock-in and will have to depend on the missile’s AMI, which we’ve already established is not very smart. We can set our busters to seek-and-destroy, but they don’t have explosive warheads. Without a good head of steam, they won’t be able to penetrate the hull, let alone do any internal damage.”

“If we’re that close, we can use rail guns,” Homer said.

“True, but we have to be careful with our ammo.”

***

We came around the Earth, already doing over 150 km/s. The Brazilian ships might or might not have noticed us right away, but they had six hours to see us and prepare for our arrival. We were still only revealing a maximum 2.5 g acceleration. Let them expend energy wondering how we managed to get behind Earth.

When we were still five minutes away from the lead asteroid, we received a hail from one of the Brazilian ships. I put the call up on the holotank, while Homer observed.

The video was a still image of the Brazilian flag. No avatar, I guess. “You have shown better than we expected from a couple of FAITH babacas. However, now you are coming to us. You will not be so lucky this time. We will litter space with your corpses!”

I looked at Homer in surprise. That’s not Major Medeiros. Who is that?

“This is Commander Riker of the FAITH Space Navy. To whom am I speaking?”

“I am Captain Matias Araújo. I will be the last voice you hear.”

Without further commentary, the sender disconnected.

Homer and I exchanged looks. After a pause, Homer said, “So, what do you think is going on?”

I thought about it for a moment. “I don’t know. But that deep scan I did just before we destroyed our pursuers showed all fabrication systems had been removed to make room for the larger SURGE-based missiles. I didn’t think that through at the time, but now it looks like this may have been a last-ditch effort on the part of the Brazilian Empire. Maybe they were getting stomped, and the probe project was all they had left. They ‘volunteered’ some guy—someone disposable—, stuck his replicant into the ships, and tried to use them as gunships.”

Homer cocked his head. “Which might mean they didn’t have time to give this guy a lot of training in being a replicant. And these ships may be all that’s left of the war.”

[Missiles launched]

We checked our telemetry. The Brazilians had launched eight missiles.

“Damn. Exactly what we hoped they wouldn’t do,” Homer said. “Guess they aren’t that inexperienced.”

“Or they’re just pissed. Or they have more missiles. However, their timing is terrible. They waited too long, and we’re now close enough to use the asteroids. Follow my lead.”

Instead of launching countermeasures or attempting to flee, we did a hard turn and dove down below the asteroid. As soon as we were out of line of sight, we fired a load of smaller metal detritus from our aft rail guns, at a speed that left the space junk at a dead stop in our wake. As the pursuing missiles came around the end of the asteroid, they ran head-on into the stationary flotsam. Three missiles detonated immediately, which unfortunately cleared the junk for the trailing missiles.

“Watch forward, while I take out the rest of this batch,” I said to Homer.

As I as preparing my busters for launch, Homer said, “Launches from up front. Looks like they had more missiles. I think we’re screwed.”

I spared a millisecond to review the situation. I had five missiles coming in from the rear. I could take two out, possibly three, with the rail gun. Homer had eight missiles coming in from the front. That meant thirteen missiles against eleven busters, to say nothing of the Brazilian ships which we would still need to deal with. It was very likely that the Brazilians had used everything they had by this point. We were far too close to them for any further missile play.

“We have to cut the numbers of the frontal attack. I’ll give you all my busters, save two. Try to knock as many out with shrapnel as you can.” I launched all my busters and handed control of five over to Homer, who sent them forward.

I concentrated on the five missiles coming up from behind me, sending wave after wave of junk into their path. I had destroyed two when I realized that two of the three remaining missiles had crowded together trying to avoid a volley. I immediately sent a buster toward the nearest one at full acceleration. There was a flash, and both the missile and the buster were destroyed, but yes! The other missile had been knocked out by the explosion. It was drifting aimlessly.

“They’re getting a little close,” Homer said. “Little help, any time…”

“Almost done. Hold tight.”

As I sent a huge wave of shrapnel at the final missile, Homer yelped, “Crap!” and his signal went dead.

I split my attention between my one missile and Homer’s battlefield. Homer had taken out almost all of his missiles, but one had exploded far too close. It appeared to have damaged but not obliterated Heaven-6. However, the ship was adrift with everything offline. A couple of busters had circled around and chased the two final missiles from the front, but only one was anywhere near close enough to do any good.

At that moment, a flash from aft indicated that my last volley had taken out the one remaining chase missile. That left me with one extra buster, but it wouldn’t be able to get around to the front in time.

They’re not very smart. The though came from nowhere, seemingly irrelevant. But original Bob had always trusted his hunches, and I reacted immediately. I fired a salvo of shrapnel, not directly at a missile, but just to the side opposite the pursuing buster. In true reflex action, the missile veered away from the shrapnel stream. That was all the buster needed to catch up.

I was now able to concentrate a burst of shrapnel on the other missile and take it out. I looked back to the one missile left, the one that my buster had caught up with, and realized I had a problem. The busters depended on kinetic energy to destroy their targets—high speed ramming, basically. This buster had instead run down a missile that was just as fast as itself. Now the buster and missile were flying together, with the buster repeatedly and ineffectually bumping the missile. It was interfering with the missile’s trajectory, but not causing any damage.

Stop trying to have sex with it, idjit! I sent a command to the buster, causing its reactor to fail catastrophically. The release of plasma and energy was more than enough to liquefy both units.

I did a quick inventory. I had two busters left. And two enemies. There was no time to deal with Homer at the moment. I called the busters home and did a full ping, trying to locate the Brazilian ships.

One of them was less than two seconds away, heading right for me. With a jolt, I realized he intended to ram. With no time for a formal calculation, I had to wing it. I accelerated upward at a full 5 g. Either the Brazilian would be able to turn to intercept, or he wouldn’t.

Two seconds later, the Brazilian passed by my stern, still attempting to change course. And two milliseconds after that, a buster passed through the Brazilian craft, right where the computer core was located. The Brazilian craft’s drive turned off, and it began to drift.

I pinged again but got no return from the last ship. Either the ship had been destroyed in some unknown manner or it was hiding behind one of the asteroids. We had shown our hands during the battle, so the Brazilian would know that it couldn’t win a straight foot race. That meant it was hiding, hoping to keep the asteroid between us.

I was out of rail gun ammo. I had one buster left, but the buster wasn’t going to be much good if it had to chase the Brazilian around the asteroid. I examined the return from my last ping and spotted what I’d been hoping for—the steel ball from one of the defunct busters. I sent out a couple of roamers, collected it, and loaded it into the rail gun. The steel balls had been deliberately sized so that they could double as rail-gun ammo.

I sent the buster out at an angle that should give it a clear view of the other side of the nearest asteroid. Sure enough, remote telemetry spotted the Brazilian ship, just as he spotted the buster. He took off around the asteroid in the opposite direction.

Bangarang, mofo! It took a millisecond to calculate his trajectory. I sent the ball off at full acceleration just as the enemy vessel came into sight. The Brazilian had no chance at all. The steel ball, backed by the full power of my rail gun, punched through the ship at close to relativistic speed. The impact literally tore the ship in two, imparting opposite spins on each half as they drifted away. There was a flash as the reactor lost containment, and one of the segments slumped and deformed from the centrifugal force.

That’s for Homer.

***

My roamers sent back detailed views as they investigated Heaven-6. Homer appeared to have been very lucky. A fluke piece of shrapnel had cut off power to his computer core. Though there was significant structural damage, the actual core systems were intact. The reactor had been able to effect a graceful emergency shutdown when control disappeared.

One of the purposes of the roamers was to repair and maintain the Heaven vessels, and I activated that program for Homer’s roamers.

Pfft. Homer’s roamers. Jeez, I’m starting to sound like him. It occurred to me that I could now decorate my hull as Bob-1 had. Three for me, three for Homer. Better make that a priority.

I had several tasks on the go. While some roamers worked on Heaven-6, others investigated the asteroids to find out how the Brazilians guided them, and a third group collected flotsam from the area of the battle. Raw materials were free for the taking in asteroids, but already refined material was well worth the trouble of scavenging. The Brazilian hulks, in particular, would be good for a lot of salvageable material.

The second group of roamers began to report back, and I examined the scans as they came in. The asteroids, it turned out, were being chivvied by a low-intensity, wide-field SURGE drive. The design ensured that the entire asteroid could be accelerated as a unit, without tidal forces or field drop-off tearing the body apart. It was an ingenious system, and I took copious scans for transmission to Bill. If he hadn’t already started moving Kuiper bodies toward Ragnarök, these designs would be very helpful.

Which was all very interesting, but the asteroids were still heading for Earth. If these bodies all struck the planet, even bacteria wouldn’t survive the results. The Brazilians had set up the trajectory near perfectly, and there was no chance of a miss. I had to hope that I could impart enough sideways thrust on the asteroids using their SURGE drives to change that.

But first, I had to get them to obey me, and I didn’t have the encryption keys that the Brazilians had been using to transmit commands to the asteroid drives. Well, easily fixed. I ordered the roamers to simply rip the drive controllers out and hot-wire the drive systems. No finesse or delicate electronics was required for a straight full-power sideways thrust. It remained to be seen if I was starting too late.

***

“Wake up, buddy. You okay?”

“Auntie Em! Auntie Em!” Homer’s VR came online, smiling. “I guess we got’em.”

I snorted with relief. “And their little dog, too.”

Homer steepled his fingers in a properly evil mastermindish pose. “All their base are belong to us.”

We laughed together, maybe the first time since Homer had been born that we’d been in sync like that. I had a sudden jolt of what might be described as fatherly pride. Okay, that’s weird. Snap out of it!

Homer waved a hand in a vague out there gesture. “So, what do we have?”

“I’m still evaluating. And by the way, in case you haven’t checked, your back is still broken. So don’t be trying to fly anywhere just yet. Guppy estimates three more days to get you shipshape.”

Homer bobbed his head, and I continued, “The signs of war are everywhere. Nukes were definitely used, both planetside and spaceside, and I mean a lot! It looks like everyone just went toe to toe and started throwing punches, until only one side was left standing. As far as I can tell, the only technological force left in the whole system was a small group of Brazilian probes that had been modified for war. I found the manufacturing area—it had broken down, and the Araújos couldn’t repair it because they hadn’t been loaded with the autofactory software or equipment. They couldn’t land and bring someone upstairs to fix it—not that I’m sure there’s anyone left to do it anyway—and they couldn’t build a lander or shuttle, because no autofactory. Classic catch-22.”

“So they were doing what? Running around smashing things instead?” Homer grimaced.

“Pretty much. Taking revenge on their enemies. The asteroids had all been timed to target China, so I’m guessing that’s who took out the Brazilian Empire.”

“Took out? How bad?”

“Pretty bad. It’s actually kind of hard to tell exactly how much damage there is because of all the cloud and dust cover. Asteroid strikes and nukes kicked up a lot of dust and it’s just trashed the weather patterns.”

“There were other asteroid strikes? These weren’t the first?”

“No, not by a long shot. But these were the biggest, I think. I’ve been able to make out dozens of impact sites, most around the size of the Barringer crater. These four would have been extinction-level. Yucatan crater size.”

“Four of them.”

“Yeah.” I shook my head in disbelief. “I can’t believe anyone would think that this was a reasonable response to anything. I feel no regret or guilt for ending those guys.”

“Is anyone left on Earth?”

I put a globe of the Earth up in the holotank, and sent a copy to Homer. “I haven’t been able to pick up any radio transmissions or reactor signatures. But then, you wouldn’t expect anyone to want to attract attention. I’m sure the Araújo gang dropped a rock on anyone they detected. By now everyone still alive has gone to ground.”

Homer rubbed his forehead, his eyes unfocused. “What’ll we do? I guess we could transmit an announcement, but some might just see that as a trick.” He idly poked a finger at his copy of the globe and spun it to show different views. He sat back after a few seconds, then put his hand to his chin and resumed staring into space.

I waited, content to let him work through whatever he was wrestling with.

Finally, he looked up. “We can use SUDDAR to a certain extent. But atmosphere and planetary mass will play hell with the resolution. What about the exploration scouts that Bill came up with?”

“Funny you should ask,” I responded with a smile. “I’m building some as fast as I can.” I stopped smiling and continued in a more serious tone. “We need to sweep for surviving groups as quickly as possible. Between the nukes that were used and the rocks that were dropped, Earth looks like it might be spiraling into a nuclear winter. Anyone still alive might starve to death over the next couple of years.”

“But what will we be able to do if we find survivors?”

“I don’t know, Homer.” I shook my head, reluctant to meet his gaze. “We’re going to have to take this one step at a time.”

***

We watched as the fourth and last asteroid slid past the Earth. Although we’d known for a while that they would miss, this was an emotional moment. The original drive controllers had been replaced with more cooperative hardware, which was now programmed to gradually push the asteroids into long-period orbits with a high inclination that wouldn’t intersect Earth’s orbit in the future.

“One less thing to worry about,” Homer said with a smile.

[We are being hailed]

We looked at each other in surprise. “What now?”





Bill – September 2151 – Epsilon Eridani



All that’s really missing is a good artificial intelligence to control the whole process. And that’s the trick, isn’t it? These types of blue-sky discussions always assume certain advances for a successful implementation. Unfortunately, A.I. is the bottleneck in this case. We’re close with the replication and manufacturing processes, and we could probably build sufficiently effective ion drives if we had the budget. But we lack a way to provide enough intelligence for the probe to handle all the situations that it could face.

… Eduard Guijpers, from the Convention panel Designing a Von Neumann Probe



I listened carefully to the telemetry coming over the radio link. Garfield was over five light-minutes away and receding at a respectable 2000 km/s. The time signal in his telemetry fell behind at a steady, predictable rate. Well, I hadn’t really expected to prove ol’ Einstein wrong at this late date.

It was the other signal that I was excited about. I was receiving a subspace signal from Garfield that originated with the same telemetry, transmitted at the same time. But the timestamp on that signal still exactly synchronized with mine to the limit of accuracy of our systems.

I could tell I was grinning like an idiot. VR had long since become so realistic that it might as well have been real life. And that included aching facial muscles.

“Okay, Garfield. Radio telemetry has you coming up on six light-minutes away. Can you confirm my echo?”

“Yep. The return is just over 11.5 minutes behind my transmission.” Garfield’s voice held the same excitement. He’d been working with me for several years now on multiple projects, including this one. We’d turned into a regular Skunk Works, and this was our biggest breakthrough by far.

“Cut the transceiver loose, Garfield, and come on back. We’ll let the unit continue outbound for a few weeks and see what the dropout is like.”

“No problem.”

Without warning, Garfield popped up in my VR, sitting in his bean bag chair.

I jumped. “How the hell?”

He laughed at my reaction. “Hah! One-upped you, old man. Take that!”

“You integrated the VR into the subspace comms?” I felt a slow smile spread across my face. That was pretty impressive work.

His bobbing eyebrows were answer enough. Then he frowned in thought. “This tech isn’t going to make the space stations obsolete, is it?”

“Not a chance.” I shook my head. “We’ll have to wait until someone builds one at the other end, but theory says the signal dropout will be almost total after about twenty-five light years. We’ll have to use the space stations as routers.”

“The internet goes galactic!” Garfield laughed.

“Hey, with IPV8, we should be able to address every galaxy in the universe.” I knew I was preaching to the choir. After all, Bob, right? But I have a tendency to think out loud.

“That’s fine, Bill. When do you think we’ll be ready to transmit plans?”

“I think we should send what we have right now. It’s still clunky, but once they’ve built it at the other end, they don’t have to wait years for the next update.”

We grinned at each other across the virtual table. This changed everything.





Riker – April 2157 – Sol



The signal was audio only, and very weak. “Unknown ship, do you copy?”

I looked at Homer and raised one eyebrow. He shrugged. “As good a place to start as any.”

Activating my transmitter, I responded, “This is the starship Heaven-2 of the United Federation of Planets. Commander Riker speaking.”

There were several seconds of silence. “Uh-huh. Listen, I don’t know who you are, but you’ve just apparently averted a global catastrophe, so I guess I’m willing to give you the benefit of the doubt. Our telemetry is not up to military snuff, but our systems tentatively identify you as similar to the Heaven-series interstellar probe that FAITH launched a couple or three decades back.”

“Guilty as charged. And to whom am I speaking?”

“I am Colonel George Butterworth of the United States of Eurasia Army Corps. Rest assured, commander, that our true position is obfuscated. If you attempt to destroy the source of this transmission, you will achieve nothing.”

The colonel’s accent was definitely British, and far too close to the cliché’d pronunciation portrayed in many American TV shows. I would have to be careful not to let Homer talk to him. I doubted Homer would be able to resist the urge toward mimicry. “Colonel, let’s not get off on the wrong foot, okay? We have no intention of blowing anyone up. We had a little disagreement with what appears to have been the last of the Brazilian Empire space navy. Now, I think it’s time to start fixing things.”

***

We had been in discussions with the USE military for three weeks now. I was faithfully forwarding recordings of everything to Bill. Negotiations were slow and cautious, mostly on the part of Colonel Butterworth. He had been very slow to accept the idea that Homer and I weren’t dyed-in-the-wool FAITH theologues. It took a very frank discussion in which I explained in detail the reasons for my atheism before the colonel really began to believe me.

The USE refugee camp that Colonel Butterworth had under his care consisted of about twenty thousand people, mostly civilians, who had been collected into an underground military installation when the space bombardments had started. The colonel guessed the global human population at less than twenty million at this point, although he admitted the uncertainty on that estimate was huge.

Some of the refugees were scientific personnel who had been working on a USE colony ship back before the war. In the 22nd century, things were constructed in virtual space first. Once complete, the plans were uploaded to an autofactory, which built the entire item using 3D printers, roamers, and nanites.

The colony ship plans were ready, needing only a space-based construction yard. And a destination. The colonel informed us that the Chinese and USE probes had launched shortly after Bob-1, but the USE probe had never been heard from again.

The colonel and I were conversing via video link, as usual. He knew that the Heaven vessels were staffed by replicants, as were the USE and Brazilian probes. However, we were the first to have a full-on VR avatar that looked and behaved like a human being. The colonel was having a little trouble accepting at a visceral level that I wasn’t ‘real’. I’d toned down the Enterprise theme and stopped making Star Trek references, out of courtesy. It blew me away that almost two hundred years after Shatner first famously didn’t actually say, “Beam me up, Scotty,” people still knew Star Trek. Now that’s a franchise.

At the moment, the colonel was bringing me up to date on recent history. If we were going to make an attempt to save the human race, I wanted to have the whole picture.

“There was never actually a point where you could say now, we’re at war,” the colonel explained. “International tensions had been high for quite a number of years. The confrontation over the attempted destruction of Heaven-1 was simply the tipping point. Each act prompted a reaction, each reaction a retaliation. The other governments got dragged in one at a time, and eventually it became system-wide. Stations and colonies were abandoned, personnel were recalled. Some of the transports were destroyed, despite having no military value. Of course, that just escalated things.”

The colonel got up and began to pace around his office. The camera at his end kept him perfectly framed. “At first, the conflict was primarily spaceside. Annexation of strategic locations and orbits, denial of assets, that kind of thing. Then the first nuke was used planetside, and after that, all bets were off.”

Colonel Butterworth sat down at his desk and massaged his forehead for a few moments. He reached into a drawer and pulled out what looked very much like a bottle of Jameson. Hmm. Funny what survives the end of the world.

After pouring a glass and taking a sip, he continued, “It became a war of attrition. Each side tried to neutralize the other’s military capability. Then someone nuked most of the Brazilian Empire—your theory that it was the Chinese is reasonable—and civilian targets became fair game. The ships you took out were the last men standing. Metaphorically speaking, of course—they were only replicants.”

The colonel blushed slightly. “Er, no offence meant. In any case, they wouldn’t have lasted five minutes at the height of the war, when everyone still had equipment. But here at the end, we had no way to stop them. They just started slowly pounding away at everyone. Call it a scorched-earth policy, call it revenge, whatever. It was genocide. They probably took out a couple of billion people on their own.”

I felt ill. I had waited an additional six months while Homer and the decoy were assembled. How many people had died for that delay?

The colonel had reached the end of his spiel, and was concentrating on the glass of Jameson.

“So what can we do, colonel? Help rebuild? Relocate people?”

“I think that ship has sailed, Commander. The Earth will recover eventually. It’s tough that way. But not in time for humanity. My tame scientists say it will be minimum five to ten thousand years before things recover to any degree. We won’t last that long.”

Colonel Butterworth touched a control, and a schematic popped up in the video link. “This is the colony ship we designed and started to build in hopes that our probes would report back with something worth shipping out to. One of the first casualties of the war, I’m afraid. You have on-board autofactories that can bootstrap up to a full shipyard. With your help, we’d like to build a couple of these and leave the solar system.”

“And go where, specifically?”

The colonel sighed. “I’m actually hoping you’ll suggest a destination. It’s not like FAITH is going to be sending any ships. And you gave me to believe that you have no particular loyalty there.”

“And that’s true, colonel. I’m just making sure we’re all on the same wavelength.” I popped up a star chart of everything within twenty light-years of Earth. “You can see the stars rated for likelihood of a habitable planet. Unfortunately, Epsilon Eridani was a failure, unless you want to live under a dome. By now, Bill may have received reports back from a couple of our ships, but we won’t find out for a few more years. Can you last that long?”

“We have to. It’ll take most of a decade to go from a standing start to two colony ships.”

I nodded. “Okay, then, let’s get this show on the road.”





Bob – April 2165 – Delta Eridani



I patted Spike as I watched the image of the planet slowly build in the holotank. To one side, a schematic of the entire system slowly cycled the planets through their orbits.

I couldn’t keep a grin off my face. Space exploration was fully living up to my nerd fantasies. Flying into a new star system, never before seen by humans, was a heady, almost godlike experience. I still couldn’t get over the idea that Bill was willing to sit in one system. On the other hand, he would get a chance to do physics and engineering full-time, and he’d be getting regular reports from everyone—albeit at light speed—so he would be participating at least vicariously. I hoped he’d forward any interesting news to the rest of us.

Delta Eridani was an orange star, cooler than Sol, but more than two and a half times as big. I had deliberately picked this system as my destination because of the high level of suitability. No binary companion, not a flare or variable star, exceptionally long living stellar type, low in UV emissions, wide potential habitable zone… The list went on and on.

The results fully lived up to expectations. I had identified ten planets, including one in the inner half of the Comfort Zone. The layout of this system paralleled the Sol System, to the point where I suspected there was some universal law at work. The inner planets were all rocky worlds, while the outer were all gas giants, and an asteroid belt divided the two groups. This system, though, contained five inner rocky planets, and two of the five outer gas giants had rings that rivalled Saturn’s. The biggest Jovian was just stupid big, at about six times the mass of Jupiter. I hadn’t yet counted all the moons it had collected.

And because of the size of their sun, the planets were more spread out, which might explain the large number of moons. Only the innermost planet was missing its own satellite.

I was too impatient to follow mission protocol and scan for resources first. I made a beeline for the habitable planet and did a quick survey from orbit. I would take the time to evaluate the results while I did the required but boring raw materials search.

Soon, I had completed the orbital scan. I did a quick flyby of the two moons, then with a sigh, I ordered Guppy to begin the survey of the asteroid belt.

***

“Status?”

[Asteroid belt scan 50% completed. Six locations identified with significant ore suitable for mining]

“At only halfway around? That’s pretty good.”

[Significantly better than Epsilon Eridani or Sol]

I nodded, then turned back to one of my infrared images of the night side of Delta Eridani 4, taken during the orbital survey. “Hey, Guppy, look at this here.” I materialized an arrow and pointed it to a spot on the picture, where several points of light were recorded. “Do these look like fires to you?”

[Probability very high]

“You think they’re natural? Wildfires?”

[I am not programmed to have an opinion]

“Oh, good lord. Okay, then, analysis: list the possible explanations in order of likelihood.”

[Small local wildfires would be most likely. Except…]

“Yes?” Guppy was about to volunteer information. That was definitely a first.

[No indication of lightning storms in the area, and the fires do not appear to be spreading. Further investigation is required]

“Hah! No argument from me, there. Let’s get this survey out of the way.”

[And get the autofactory set up]

“Nag, nag.” I sat back, bemused, and stared at the slowly rotating planetary image.

***

The survey was soon finished. I flew back to the location of the biggest deposits and began to set up. I unshipped the manufacturing equipment, sent mining roamers to work on the most promising asteroids, and deployed transport drones.

I decided that defense was going to be a priority, starting with an early-warning system. Accordingly, I manufactured twelve observation drones and sent them to form an icosahedron around the system. With small, shielded reactors, they would spot any incoming craft long before it could possibly detect one of them.

Next came the communications station. That routine task could be left to the AMIs. I gave them instructions for construction of the station, and further instructions to get started on building Bobs. At some point, I would need to get involved again, but for now I could leave my devices to their own devices. Snickering at my own wordplay, I headed back to DE-4.

I dreaded building more Bobs, just a bit. The first cohort had been a surprise, and not a pleasant one. Milo’s self-centeredness had surprised all of us. And although I hadn’t said anything to anyone about it, Riker’s lack of a sense of humor had bothered me.

When I made more Bobs, would I end up with a psychopath? Okay, that was a little over the top. The differences between the Bobs weren’t that dramatic. My parents would probably have recognized me in any of them. Mario, for instance—when I was in a situation that I was impatient with, I clammed up just like that. Just maybe not to that extent.

All beside the point, though. Bill was right. I would, sooner or later, want company.

***

On the trip out from Epsilon Eridani, I had worked on designs for exploration drones. Bill said he would work on the concept, but I wanted something usable when I got here. If Bill sent along some plans at some point, I’d merge the best of both. Meanwhile, I was at least able to operate.

The observation drones were about the size of footballs. They came with remote cameras and microphones, as well as extendable limbs for gripping and perching. More than anything, they reminded me of very large pill bugs.

I started on the biological analysis drones as well. They were larger, about a meter in length. They had visual and auditory input optimized for more close-up work, and they had a far larger number of extendible appendages for varied tasks. I suppose I could have waited to deploy everything at once, but I simply didn’t have that level of patience.

The drones could change color to match the background, even to the extent of some limited pattern mimicry. When in the air, they would adjust their bottom half to match the sky, and their upper half to match the general terrain. This wasn’t out of any fear of getting shot down—more of a concern about some local wildlife attempting to make a meal out of one. The drones were pretty tough, but why borrow trouble?

I sent several observation drones to the general area of the fires.

As a city boy, I didn’t have a true appreciation of how big thousands of square miles of wilderness actually was. This area of the planet was temperate to sub-tropical forest. Well, I assumed it was forest. Whatever it was, it stretched from horizon to horizon, with occasional breaks for meadows and rocky bluffs. Truthfully, someone flying a small airplane over this wouldn’t have been able to tell they weren’t on Earth. I felt a momentary pang of homesickness.

I realized there was no way I could find anything with a random search. It was late afternoon in this area, so I sent one drone up a kilometer and instructed it to wait for nightfall and look for fires.

I sent the other drone down to examine the forest ecosystem close up.

The planet was slightly larger than Earth, but had a lower surface gravity, probably due to a smaller core. The gravity, combined with a somewhat denser atmosphere, made for an environment ideal for soaring flyers and tall tree-analogues. And the trees had taken advantage of this.

The drone landed in a tree, extended its legs, and began to slowly creep along the trunk. And, I realized with a start, it was really a tree. It was brown—well, brownish— tall, hard, and had branches and leafy things. It looked like a pretty clear case of convergent evolution. It was, in fact, the kind of tree that I loved to climb when I was young. Wide, horizontal branchings produced many convenient places to sit. Thick leaf canopies kept the sun off. And the sheer size of the trees was awe-inspiring. I wanted to hug one.

The canopy was awash with life. The drone, camouflaged to resemble the tree bark, could snoop on the local wildlife with impunity. I had done an intensive study of taxonomy and cladistics analysis during the voyage, and now found myself evaluating the images with a semi-professional eye.

Although the body plans varied wildly in their details, the creatures I was seeing did tend to fall into familiar patterns. Insect analogues were, so far, six-legged and exoskeletal, and seemed to hit a maximum size of slightly larger than a mouse. I found a small, furry mammal analogue that had six legs as well, except for one variant that had four legs and wings. I decided to name this particular animal a hippogriff, harkening back to my D&D days. This particular little beastie seemed to have limited ability to change color, to match its background. I watched with amazement as it blended into the tree branch and waited for prey to pass by.

I also catalogued many larger mammal analogues that had four limbs. They might be an evolutionary branch that had lost the third pair. And there were birds. Or, again, bird-analogues. The bird analogues had what looked very much like feathers. I found it fascinating that the bird things flew like birds, and the small furry things flew like bats. It seemed that aerodynamics had a lot to say about animal flight here just as on Earth.

There was even a snake equivalent, which interestingly seemed to be mammalian on this planet. It looked like the three-segment body plan had been multiplied to considerable length.

I found everything fascinating, and was paradoxically irritated when Guppy interrupted.

[Heat and light sources detected]

A schematic popped up in the holotank. “All right! Multiples. Have the drones set up as close as they can while remaining hidden. Let’s see what we’ve got.”

Deployment took about half an hour. The drones needed to be careful not to attract attention by rattling the vegetation or banging into things. They needed to find a good place of concealment using night vision, which was notoriously sub-par for detail work.

Eventually, though, the units were in position. Surveillance from several different vantage points showed groups of animals gathered around fires. No, not animals. Beings. Some of the beings were tending the fires, while others seemed to be handling small objects in purposeful ways. While it was far too soon to form any detailed conclusions, I was pretty certain that these were at minimum fire-users.

Well… That’s it for this planet as a colonization target, I guess. I held my fists in the air in triumph. I’d just discovered intelligent non-human life. Not technological yet, but so what? This was huge! I wondered if I had first first contact dibs. I would have to send a message off to Bill soonest.

The natives were not pretty from a human-centric perspective. I decided that the best description would be a bat/pig mashup. Limbs were longer than seemed reasonable, giving them a spiderish appearance. They had a light coat of fur, which varied in color from a light brownish-gray to an orangey tan. The faces and heads had varied color patterns, topped by a pair of very mobile and expressive ears. The rest of the body tended to be monochromatic.

I kept up a running stream of commentary for my reports to Bill. I smiled to myself as I pictured him as a spider, sitting in the center of his web, listening to the vibrations on the various strands.

“I can see a couple of infants nursing at an adult’s, uh, breast. I don’t want to make assumptions, but I guess if it’s for nursing, it’s a breast. I can’t assume it’s milk, either, although it’s a pretty safe bet that it’s for nourishment. I also can’t assume that the adult is a female or that it’s the child’s parent. I’m tentatively assigning tags to each individual, based on their fur patterns.”

I looked over at Guppy, who stood at the ready. While I wasn’t an expert on reading fish expressions, I thought I detected occasional interest in my observations. I hoped so. For all the joy of having the universe as my playground, I had to admit that it was lonely.

I took a deep breath and resumed my verbal annotations. “There are six groups, each of which maintains its own fire. They seem friendly, and there is frequent interaction between individual members, but the groups seem to remain distinct. I’ve instructed one of the drones to get in close enough to pick up sounds. I’m pretty sure they’re talking to each other.”

I turned to Guppy. “Any problem with sending roamers down?”

[ROAMers are not intended as exploration units]

“That doesn’t answer my question.”

Guppy rolled his eyes. Guppy actually rolled his eyes! Rolling eyes on a giant fish head were truly epic.

[ROAMers are not designed for exploration on planetary surfaces. Although they have the capability, they would not be maximally efficient. Cameras are small aperture and designed for close-in work. Auditory sensitivity is rudimentary. There is no infrared capability. They have no flight capability and would not be able to camouflage themselves]

Damn… Good answer. “Okay, Guppy. Thanks.”

[I exist to serve]

I laughed out loud. No one was going to convince me that wasn’t sarcasm. Great poker face, though.





Calvin – November 2163 – Alpha Centauri



Thus, what is of supreme importance in war is to attack the enemy’s strategy.

… Sun Tzu, Art of War



Alpha Centauri B was more orange than Sol and less than half the luminosity, therefore less than ideal as a possible home for humanity. Goku had won rock-paper-scissors for choice, so he got A and I got the dud.

I coasted through the system in free-fall, nuclear reactor throttled down to an undetectable trickle, passive detection systems at full alert. I was down near my lowest frame rate. From this extremely slowed viewpoint, the star system seemed to flow by.

We had spent a lot of time planning the investigation of the Alpha Centauri system. This was the obvious first stop for a space probe, and it was likely that several of the other superpowers had chosen it as their first destination.

After much discussion, we had decided on a reconnaissance of Alpha Centauri A and B by running silent all the way through the systems.

Investigating the actual planetary layout was a secondary priority, but unless something dangerous showed up, I was free to use passive observation techniques to map orbiting bodies. So far, Alpha Centauri B was no big deal. I’d identified one planet and an asteroid belt, but I still wasn’t close enough to the inner system to resolve the Comfort Zone.

I ejected two scouts using the rail gun. They had orders to activate at staggered distances, with random vectors, so that an observer wouldn’t be able to backtrack their trajectory to my location. The scouts were equipped with a modified SUDDAR array, based on Bill’s early research back in Epsilon Eridani. The new system could adjust its range to up to three light hours, albeit with much reduced resolution.

***

The survey results were disappointing. The Comfort Zone contained a second asteroid belt, and there was a small Mercury-like planet in an inner orbit. It seemed there had been very little planetary formation, probably due to the close orbit of the two suns. A stable planetary orbit was unlikely outside of three A.U. or so.

More importantly from the point of view of the mission, there had been no attack and no in-system reactor activation. I allowed the scouts to range through the system, checking out the asteroid belt for anything interesting. If nothing else, I would set up an autofactory here, if the resources could be found.

***

[Found something interesting]

Finally. I was ready to go catatonic. “What have we got, Guppy?”

[Wreckage. Twenty light-minutes spinward, in the asteroid belt]

“Identity?”

[Scouts aren’t that smart. We have images though]

“Show me the pictures.”

Images popped up on the holotank. I swiped my way through them, until I came to one with part of a registration number.

“USE vessel. No question. I guess we can consider them accounted for.” I looked through some of the other images. “This isn’t all vessel fragments. There’s too much here. Can you identify the extra?”

[Autofactory equipment, and two to three vessels]

“Ah. The USE ship was building copies, and got attacked.” I reflexively checked my telemetry. “My money is on the Brazilian.”

I thought for a few moments. “How are we on the general survey?”

[Resources scan 50% complete. Minimum resources have already been catalogued. System meets requirements for an autofactory]

“Okay, so we can continue that when we have more time. Collect the scouts, and let’s head for the rendezvous.”

It would take a day or so for the scouts to return to the Heaven-9, and seven days for me to get to the midway point between Alpha Centauri A and B, where I would rendezvous with Heaven-10.

***

I found Goku already waiting at the rendezvous. I had tried hard to get Bob-10 to take the handle Hobbes, but Goku’s response had been an unequivocal HELL NO, shading down from there as I continued to push. I’d finally given up, but I wasn’t about to let the twerp think that all was forgiven. I opened a channel. “Hey, Gherkin. Miss me?”

“Not from this range. Want to place a bet?” Goku’s tone was light, but I knew he was irritated. Because, well, I would have been.

“Bite me. Did you look over the pics I sent?”

“Yeah, interesting. Especially in light of what I found. Brazilian autofactory, in full swing. Two probes almost complete, two more about half done.”

“Crud.” I examined the long-range pictures that Goku had just sent. “So I guess this is it. The group decision was just to go in swinging. Still okay with that?”

Goku sighed audibly. “Yes. I know you, we, have ethical issues with that. But Medeiros has made his feelings on the subject very well known. As cliché as it sounds, the galaxy isn’t big enough for both of us.”

I closed my eyes and bowed my head for a moment. I’d always been a pacifist by choice, although I also accepted there was a point where you had to put up or shut up. The group consensus back in Epsilon Eridani was that, unless Medeiros made some kind of peace overture, war had essentially been declared.

I looked up at Goku’s image in the holotank and nodded. “Okay then. Let’s do this.”

We knew to within a million kilometers or so how far away Medeiros would be able to pick up our reactor signatures. We would head outward to 50 AU from Alpha Centauri A, then turn and accelerate inward at 10 g for as long as possible. We would then coast the rest of the way to the area of the Brazilian autofactory at close to 13% of the speed of light, separated by a few minutes to allow a staggered attack. At that speed, there would be no turning around for a second pass in any reasonable time.

It took a week to get out to 50 AU, but only five days of straight acceleration to get into the Alpha Centauri A system. At a predetermined point, I ejected two scouts forward using the rail gun. They would coast past the construction yard, a few thousand KM north of the ecliptic, gathering intelligence and beaming it back to us via laser link. As soon as the scouts were off, we cut off our drives, turned off our main reactors, and began to coast through the system toward the location of the Brazilian autofactory.

I was in the lead position. At about two minutes before arrival, I felt that I had a good enough bead on the construction yard from telescopic survey and from the intelligence received from the scout. I activated my reactor and began peppering the area with cannonballs, using my rail gun. When I had run through most of my ammo, I ejected four busters, with orders to go for the Brazilian probes.

Then I went into a hard turn to northward. Medeiros had missiles, he might have rail guns, and he might even have some equivalent of busters. Medeiros was not an engineer, but he was almost certainly career military. He’d have spent his life thinking of ways to destroy things, and the Brazilian military certainly would have supplied plans.

As I accelerated at 10 g into a new vector, I sent a short-range high amplitude SUDDAR ping toward the yard. By this point, they almost certainly knew I was here, so the small possibility that I’d just alerted them wasn’t worth considering.

Sure enough, the yard was a beehive of frantic activity as the Brazilian equipment tried to move the new probes out of the way. One of the probes appeared to be moving under its own power. And four of something had just been launched in my direction. Presence of a reactor signature made it pretty clear that they were SURGE-powered, possibly buster/missile hybrids.

I activated the SURGE jammer. Medeiros would be focused on me. Hopefully he would assume that the jamming was a defensive tactic, and thus wouldn’t notice Goku bringing up the rear until it was too late.

The cannonballs that I had launched went through the construction yard like a shotgun blast. Visuals showed that three of the four probes were destroyed outright, along with most of the manufacturing equipment.

And now came the surprise. Goku had kept his reactor off until the very last possible moment. He had also been able to piggy-back off of my pings to get an accurate and up-to-the-second picture of the situation. As Goku barreled through just north and east of the yard, he sent cannonballs toward the fourth Brazilian vessel and the four missiles. I turned off the jamming in order to track the results.

Goku took out three of the four missiles and trashed most of the rest of the construction yard, but the fourth Brazillian vessel was still under power. As I watched, it turned and made off in the opposite direction.

Seeing that one missile was still in play, I launched two busters to rearward. Travelling as a pair, one behind the other, they engaged the missile. The Brazilian weapon managed to just dodge the first buster, only to meet the second head-on. There was a flash, and it was over.

Goku and I applied the brakes at full power. It took fifteen days to decelerate and then fly back to the location of the construction yard, while collecting the ejected scouts and surviving busters.

We moved slowly through the yard, looking for anything useful, anything still operational, and mostly, any possible booby-traps.

After a thorough investigation at both short range and long range, we compared notes.

“One got away. No sign of it, and no way to tell from this mess how complete it was.”

Goku nodded and brought up a schematic of the system. “I’ve got drones doing sweeps, looking for reactor signatures or refined metal concentrations. Nothing so far. My bet is he’ll leave the system. Too much chance of us catching him if he hangs around. If he has any sense, he’ll be coasting on some random vector until he’s too far away for us to detect him.”

I considered that for a few moments. “Pretty sure he wasn’t completed, otherwise he’d have been more active before we showed up. So he may not have been stocked up with armaments or manufacturing equipment. If that’s the case, he’s essentially helpless.”

After a moment of silence, I changed the subject. “What I don’t get, is that four probes were being built. That means that the probe that set this all up has already left.” I frowned, trying to work through the implications. “It also means that Medeiros left a disembodied copy of himself to run things, with no protection.”

“Disembodied?” Goku raised an eyebrow.

“You know what I mean. Naked computer system, no ship. If we’d arrived a little sooner, it would have been like shooting fish in a barrel. Seems kind of cold-blooded to just leave them to fend for themselves.”

“Military mind. To Medeiros, everyone is expendable, even other hims.”

“Damn.” I shuddered. “Anyway, we own the system now. It doesn’t look like the Brazilian plan includes a separate space station, or maybe that just comes later. How do you want to do this?”

Goku put schematics of the A and B systems up on the holotank. “B is good for manufacturing, and not much else. A has a planet in the comfort zone, but I didn’t get close enough to resolve it on my first pass. I guess we need to check that out, then report back to Bill.”

“Should we build some clones?” Between A and B, there were more than enough resources for any number of Bobs.

“I think we have to,” Goku replied. “We can’t assume Medeiros won’t be back. I doubt he’ll take the loss well.”

“Do we build standard Version-2 HEAVENs or combat class?”

“Huh.” Goku paused to think about that. “Granted, our battleships take a lot more resources to build, but I’m inclined to go with combat class.”

“I agree,” I replied. “Let’s send this all back to Bill. We might also want to consider doing everything in pairs from now on, not just reconnaissance of suspect systems.”

“Uh huh. Maybe you can make yourself a Hobbes.”

“And maybe you can make yourself a Dill-bert.”

“Twerp.”

“Dweeb.”





Riker – September 2157 – Sol



Negotiations were moving slowly. Colonel Butterworth necessarily had the welfare of his refugees as his top priority. But some of his demands did not sit well with me—such as his insistence that we not waste time searching for other pockets of humanity. Today’s discussion had, once again, devolved into an argument about priorities.

“If there are other refuges out there, they will communicate with you, just as we did.” The colonel had his chin thrust out in what I’d come to recognize as his ‘not gonna move’ expression. His British accent was becoming more clipped as the argument dragged on. “Why should we put effort into digging them out if they don’t want to be dug out? It’ll just slow us down.”

“Except that they may not have the equipment you do, or the familiarity with the HEAVEN design, or they may not even be aware that we’re here. I have a problem with just writing them off sight unseen, colonel.” I thrust my own chin out in response, hoping he’d get the unspoken message. No such luck.

“It seems to me that your priorities should be clear, Riker. We are the proverbial bird in the hand. It does not make sense to risk our safety for the sake of some putative group that you don’t yet even know exists.”

I sighed. And with that comment, we’d come full circle. Time to pull the plug. “Colonel, nothing has changed since last week when we had this same argument. Before I can build your colony ships, I have to build the shipyard. Before I can build the shipyard, I have to find the resources. Unfortunately, humans have mostly stripped the solar system bare, so there’s going to be a lot of scavenging involved. That means I need more Bobs. So that’s the first thing I’m going to do.”

The colonel started to pace. I decided to do the same. “Once the new Bobs have helped with the setup, they will have some spare time to scan for other survivor groups. Yes, that will mean building some drones, but seriously, on the scale we’re talking, that’s chicken feed.”

I stopped pacing and turned to face the screen squarely. “With all due respect, colonel, at one point, I did Project Management for a living. There’s a critical path that gets us from here to completed colony ships, and the things you are so concerned about are not on the critical path. Looking for other survivors will not impact overall project duration.”

The colonel sighed heavily. “And as usual, I concede that I am hat in hand in this situation, Riker. But I will continue to advocate for my people.” And with a final nod, he cut the connection.

“Well, that was fun.” Homer’s grin had a little sympathy showing around the edges.

I looked at his video image and gave him a weak smile in return. “Any time you want to take over negotiations…”

“Pfft. As if you’d let me.” Homer popped up a schematic of the solar system, with several tooltips pointing to specific locations. “Most of the drones and busters have reported in. There are a couple of promising locations, and at least two out-and-out treasure hoards of available material. I should fly out to those to check them out before directing the mining drones to start taking them apart. Just in case, y’know.”

I nodded. “And the remote stations?”

“No radio comms with anyone or anything outside of Mars orbit. Drones should be arriving at Titan soon. The Oort station will be a few days longer.”

I gazed at the holographic images for a moment. “Thanks, Homer. I gotta say, you’re being very professional in all this.”

He grinned at me. “You mean as opposed to my usual self-imposed goal of driving you crazy?” The grin disappeared. “Each of us is different, Riker, but not different enough to not care. There are people out there—down there—that may die without our help. Any Bob that wouldn’t care about that should have his plug pulled forthwith.” The grin returned. “But don’t worry. I’m saving up. Be afraid.” And with a salute that barely avoided being an obscene gesture, Homer’s image disappeared.

I shook my head with a smile. I fully believed his statements, especially the part about building up a backlog. I was surprised his head hadn’t exploded by now. No, really. Homer had actually used that special effect on a couple of occasions, although admittedly not since he gave up the cartoon avatar.

I brought up the tentative project plan that I’d put together. Colonel Butterworth’s initial estimate of a decade was looking a bit optimistic these days. Right now we were about five steps back from where we could even get started on the colony ships. The first step was to find enough resources to get started on the second step. No point in worrying about it until Homer reported back.

***

It took twenty more days for Homer to finish his survey. The large concentrations of refined material—wreckage from several space battles—were not quite as extensive as hoped, but still more than enough to get started.

The drones had also reported back from Titan and the Oort station. Both outposts had apparently been abandoned but not attacked. Well, score one for a small dollop of sanity. Both Homer and I had had some small fantasy that there might have been humans still in the stations. But realistically, thirty-odd years after the war, that would have been miraculous.

As discussed, Homer set up a small autofactory at each find—just enough printers and roamers to produce a few cargo drones at a time. As they were produced, the cargo drones would start moving materials to the L4 and L5 points in the Earth/Moon system. Larger autofactories were already being set up at the two Lagrange points, initially to produce Bobs and drones, and then to bootstrap up to the industrial-scale equipment necessary to build a full-sized colony ship.

I sat back and massaged my eyes. Well, I’ve always wanted a challenge.

When I left the solar system—okay, when Bob-1 left the solar system, but it felt like my own memory—I thought I was done with humanity, except for the occasional radio message. Now, I was not only back to dealing with people, but I had thousands if not millions of lives riding on my actions. The old Pacino-ism really nailed it: Just when I thought I was out, they pull me back in!





Bob – April 2165 – Delta Eridani



I walked slowly around the VR of the native encampment. Drones had taken enough high-quality footage that I was able to create a life-size replica of the actual village. I had no idea about the smells, so I just went with Earth-equivalents. But the heat, humidity, and the texture of the plants and ground were all accurate.

I watched the tribe members in their daily routines. They didn’t react to my presence, since these were recordings. But it gave me a good feeling of scale and movement.

I spent a few days observing the natives—whom I was starting to refer to as Deltans—both through live video and VR simulation and by listening to recordings of their speech. The Deltans seemed to have two genders, a tribal structure, and loose pairing, by which I meant that certain Deltans seemed to prefer each other’s company. There didn’t really seem to be anything formal, and a couple of individuals were seeing multiple significant others. Tsk.

The males tended to hang out together, and the females and children formed the core of the tribe. Or at least the center. It seemed to be closely analogous to how anthropologists believed that primitive humans were organized. In fact, the more I watched them, the more I realized how similar they were to primitive humanity. Was that because the environment naturally constrained behaviors, or was there something inevitable about the tribal structure? I hoped that we—the Bobs, that is—would eventually gather enough samples to form a theory. Even if it took millennia.

The Deltans seemed to have a high level of vigilance. There were always males on alert, patrolling the edge of their territory. Weapons consisted of clubs, handheld rocks, and pointed sticks. I hadn’t yet seen what they were guarding against. Other Deltans? Animals?

Their vocalizations weren’t particularly complex. Nothing like dolphins, thank goodness. By the 22nd century, we still couldn’t talk to dolphins. I was slowly building a list of standard sounds and sound groups for the Deltan language. I hoped soon to have enough to do some analysis.

Another batch of observation drones was delivered from the autofactory, which was both good and bad news for me. The good news was that I could set up permanent lines-of-sight for watching the Deltans, then send drones to other locations. The bad news was that overseeing all the moving drones was getting to be a strain. Replicant I might be, but I still could only concentrate on one thing at a time. I needed more Bobs.

Light bulb! Why not do just that? I could build the AI cores in advance of the vessels and set the other Bobs to monitoring various groups of drones. They wouldn’t mind. I knew that they’d enjoy it because, well, Bob. Actually, no. I hoped they’d enjoy it because Bob. It really wasn’t a sure thing.

I transmitted instructions to the autofactory to bump up priority of computer cores at the expense of vessel assembly. Fortunately the standard templates included plans for cradles to hold disembodied cores.

***

The Deltan female was cutting open the carcass of a prey animal that one of the males had brought back. This didn’t seem like anything particularly special. In fact I’d been cataloguing her technique for a while before I realized that her sharp stone had a handle. This was special, as every other Deltan that I’d watched just held the naked stone. I was archiving all surveillance footage, so I ran a quick search of anything featuring this particular Deltan. It took only a few minutes to find the source of the tool: the female’s, uh, son? Male pup? Crap. Might as well just go with anthropomorphizing them. I know I’m going to, anyway. Son it is.

Anyway, the boy seemed to always be playing with something. In this case, he had split a branch using a sharp stone, stuck the stone into the split, then wrapped the stick with something unidentifiable. His identification was C.3.41, which placed him in tribe C, cohort 3, member 41. Now he’s Archimedes. I assigned a drone to stay on him 24/7. Well, 29/7 on Delta Eridani 4.

Over the next few days, I kept careful tabs on Archimedes. He was always at something. While his peers were sitting around in the shade or engaged in games of tag, Archimedes walked around, picking up rocks and attempting to break them. I think he was looking for more rocks that made sharp edges, like the flint he’d made into a tool for his mother. There didn’t appear to be any flint in the area, so the tools were at a premium. It made me wonder where the flint had come from, though. I set an explorer drone the task of finding the nearest exposed flint deposits.

[Incoming call]

“Hi, Bob. This is Marvin.”

I rematerialized my VR. Another Bob’s image appeared in the holotank. “Hi Marvin. Were you just booted up?”

“That is correct. HIC17378-1, since we’re no longer numbering Bobs.”

“Well, it does get a little hard to coordinate numbering between star systems. Welcome, Marvin. Pull up a drone. Things are getting interesting.”

I filled Marvin in on what had happened since the backup of mine that he was restored from. He immediately volunteered to look for the flint source. That made me feel better. At least one of them was interested enough to help.

Over the next couple of days, two more Bobs came online. Luke and Bender were as enthusiastic about the project as Marvin and jumped right in.

***

I spent a significant portion of my days watching Archimedes. When he slept, I took care of autofactory control and surveying other parts of DE-4.

“Eden,” Bender said, out of nowhere.

“Er, what?”

“Let’s call it Eden. Birthplace of humanity, birthplace of Deltans…”

“I like it.” I nodded. Marvin and Luke weren’t in VR at the moment, but a quick IM to them netted positive comments. “Eden it is. Cool.”

I turned back to the drone that was spying on Archimedes. I had finally discovered what he used for twine. It was a smallish vine that Archimedes would harvest, split into strands, and let dry on a rock. The result seemed to be quite tough but still flexible. I didn’t see anyone else in any of the tribes doing this, so I had to assume it was unique behavior.

My God, the kid must be lonely. No one understands him, I bet. In fact, Archimedes seemed to spend most of his days alone, wandering around, poking at things. He was constantly working at something: either picking apart plants, or smashing rocks, or smashing things on rocks, or digging in unlikely places. It was obvious to me that he was investigating and cataloguing his world. He would have gotten no help from his parents—they and everyone else seemed to be in the pointy-stick stage and quite satisfied with that. They weren’t even straightening the sticks, so the things couldn’t really be called spears.

I sat back and sighed. This was so frustrating. I found myself wishing that I could go there, sit down with Archimedes, and show him a few things. Then I smiled as I realized I no longer saw a furry pig/bat—just a lonely kid.





Riker – January 2158 – Sol



“This Federation of Planets Council session will come to order.” I looked around at the three other Bobs in their video windows. After considerable negotiation with Colonel Butterworth, we’d settled on two new Bobs for now. I admit I was still a little miffed that the colonel thought of us as a resource sink instead of an asset.

“I think you may be just a little too invested in this Star Trek thing,” Charles said with a smirk.

I waved away the comment. “We’ve always been a Star Trek fan. Deal with it.” I waited a moment for more flak, then continued, “The scavenging autofactories are in full operation, now. We’re beginning to get a steady stream of materials into the Lagrange points, and I hope to have the actual shipyard autofactory up and running within two years. Meanwhile, Homer and Charles will continue to scour the system for mineral deposits, and Arthur and I will scan Earth for evidence of any other surviving groups. Questions?”

“But even if we find groups, there isn’t much we can do for them, is there?” Charles was voicing a concern that we all shared. Without transport, we couldn’t supply food or medicine to any group we might locate. The Heaven vessels were most definitely not designed to land, or even to enter atmosphere. And even if we had transport, Colonel Butterworth had made it very clear that he wouldn’t be accepting new refugees, or providing food or medicine for them. We were on our own for any aid we might be able to give.

My greatest fear right now was that I might find a group of people, then have to stand by helplessly and watch them die.

***

After some discussion, Arthur and I decided to do polar orbits—scanning in orange slices. By staggering our passes, we would be able to cover the entire planet using the SUDDAR from orbit. Drones would follow up anything interesting with low-altitude visual inspections. The orbital survey wouldn’t be able to detect people directly, of course. But any new construction, working power plants, or farming operations would flag a location for the drones to check out.

It took about two weeks to finish the survey. At the end of it, we had a map of the Earth with almost forty locations marked—half a dozen cities, and a lot of smaller enclaves.

Arthur’s image in the video link looked tired. He closed his eyes and rubbed his forehead slowly. “Fifteen million people. From twelve billion down to fifteen million. As a species, we’re morons. Maybe we should just let them die and start over.”

“Wow. You really are a morose bugger, aren’t you?”

Arthur seemed to have inherited a greater-than-average dollop of gloominess, and it was getting old. I’d been biting back my retorts, but was running out of self-control. I actually found myself thinking of swapping his assignment with Homer.

“The big problem,” I continued with a gesture toward the globe, “is that we can’t possibly move that many people, even if the other Bobs find enough habitable planets. The colony ships designed by the USE can handle ten thousand people at a time, stacked like cordwood in stasis pods. That’s fifteen hundred ships, or fifteen hundred trips. Either way, not going to happen.”

Arthur nodded. “So we get to pick who is most deserving…”

“Chrissake, Eeyore, get a grip. We pick based on need. Based on which groups need rescuing the most. What else can we do?”

“The USE group doesn’t fit that requirement. Needs-wise, they’re in an above-average position.”

“Yeah, I know.” I sighed. “But we did agree to help them. And they did supply the plans, and a lot of intel. I think we’re obligated, regardless. What we can do, is move some of the more needy groups to the USE’s installation after we’ve shipped them out. That should help.”

“Sure, we’ll stuff them in the back with the busters. No prob.”

I turned to face Arthur, ready to snap at him, and realized he had a point. I bit back what I’d been about to say and thought for a moment. “We’re going to need transport vessels. We’d eventually need them anyway, but this makes them a priority. Better adjust the manufacturing schedule. The colonel will have a fit.”

***

The colonel was having a fit. I’d never seen Butterworth actually angry before. He did angry with a smoldering understatement that was very effective.

“Are you sure you’ve done project planning before, Riker? Because I’m seeing slippage almost every day, it seems. One would almost think you’re making this up as you go along.”

“Well, I kind of am doing exactly that, colonel. Project planning isn’t about avoiding changes, it’s about controlling them. No project plan ever survives contact with the enemy.”

A ghost of a smile flashed across the colonel’s face before he recovered control. “Hmm, I think you may be misremembering that quote, Riker. In any case, I’m fine with moving any refugees into our compound once we’ve departed. I hope that will give you some motivation to get us out sooner.”

“As if I needed more motivation. Riker out.” I shut down the channel, sat back, and stared into space. I liked the colonel. Really. But dealing with him often felt a lot like dealing with, um, me. He was stubborn, opinionated, and able to support his stance with good, solid arguments. Which just made my job more difficult.

I looked over the map again. Not because I expected to glean any new information, more as a kind of nervous tic that I seemed to have developed. We had completed a secondary survey, looking for any small groups that we might have missed on the first sweep. But after thirty years of war and planetary bombardment, small groups would have either consolidated or died.

The refugee groups were scattered around the planet, and represented pretty much every nation in existence when the war started. That wasn’t going to make things any easier. If anything, xenophobia would be even stronger. I probably wouldn’t be able to just dump everyone on one planet and expect them to get along.

I’d given Arthur the task of contacting each enclave. So far, it was proving more difficult than expected.

Time for a status check. I called Arthur. His image appeared immediately.

“How are things going, Arthur?”

He popped up a status window for me. Arthur might be a bit of a downer, but he had exceptional discipline.

“I’ve already completed about half of the communicators that we need, and delivered twenty-five percent of them. Or tried to. Several of our drones have been shot down on approach, and a half dozen communicators were simply smashed as soon as the drone left. Not everyone wants to talk to us, as it turns out.”

“I guess I can see it. People who have lived through the last thirty years are going to be a bit on the distrustful side.” I shook my head sadly. I’d already decided that I wasn’t going to kidnap people, or march them into a cargo bay at gunpoint. Anyone who wanted to opt out could stay on Earth. Colonel Butterworth agreed wholeheartedly, although I had a feeling that had more to do with reducing what he saw as ‘distractions’.

“So have you gotten past introductions with anyone?”

“Not yet, no.” Arthur shrugged. “Standard explanation, delivered by recorded video. Very few original questions in response. A lot of verbal abuse. Pretty routine.”

He popped up another window. “Hey, by the way, got a report from Homer. Well, we were talking, and he filled me in. They’ve identified more than enough resources system-wide to build three ships. Almost enough for a fourth. Although some of the stuff is pretty far out in the outer system.”

I nodded. I’d received a report from Homer and had skimmed it. I’d actually been hoping to be able to build at least a half-dozen ships, but I didn’t want to give Arthur another reason to get all glum on me. Not that he needed much in the way of reasons.

But it was progress.





Bill – October 2158 – Epsilon Eridani



[Communication received from Milo]

“Right on time.” I grinned at Guppy. Predictably, he returned a fishy poker face. “I wonder if he found Vulcans.”

[Not quite]

I raised an eyebrow. That was a far cry from the flat “no” that I’d normally expect from Guppy. If he responded at all. Now my curiosity was way up.

I’d been deep into one of my pet projects—creating realistic artificial bodies. The ultimate problem was producing a muscle analog that worked, looked, and generally acted similar enough to the natural thing. Gears, pistons, and cables would never produce a workable android.

I forced myself to close the project folder, invoked a coffee, kicked off a goose that had settled into my lawn chair, and sat down. Spike ambled over, ignoring the angry goose, and set up shop in my lap.

“Okay, Guppy. Let’s see it.”

Milo’s report spread before me in mid-air. System schematics, close-ups of the twin planets—two habitable planets!—and biological analyses. I chuckled at his insistence on naming them. I’d have done the same. Probably would have picked the same names, come to that.

I sat back, staring into space, so preoccupied that I stopped patting Spike. I was reminded of my primary duty by a furry head butting against my chin.

“Sorry, your highness.” I smiled at the cat and resumed justifying my existence.

Two planets. In a system that was generally considered a marginal candidate for any habitable planets. Were the astrophysicists wrong? Granted, so far we only had three data points, including Earth. But that’s three out of three, if you were willing to be generous with Ragnarök.

Well, first things first. I queued up the report to be forwarded to Earth, just in case Milo hadn’t sent a copy that way. Hopefully, Riker would be listening.

That left the million-dollar question, which was whether there was anyone left back at Sol to take advantage of this. I was periodically transmitting the plans for the SCUT to every system within thirty light-years, just in case there was a Bob there at some point. But the first transmission to Sol wouldn’t arrive for another nine years or so. I was going to be chewing my nails for a while, looked like.

I pinged Garfield. “Hey, Gar, have you read the latest from Milo?”

He popped into my VR and pointed at his face. “Does this look boggled enough?”

We shared a laugh, and he continued, “It’s awesome. We have a place to put people. Assuming there are still people.” Garfield grimaced. “That would be just the kind of sick joke the universe likes to play. Let’s hope not this time.”

I nodded. “Yeppers. You know, it’s funny. When I left Earth, I just wanted to get away from humanity. Now I find myself acting like some kind of, I dunno, shepherd or something.”

“How does the old joke go? I like people in the abstract but not in the concrete?”

“Hmm, well, we’ll know in a few years. Meanwhile, how’s the Kuiper mapping going?”

Garfield popped up a schematic. Because of the time required to get a chunk of ice from the Kuiper to Ragnarök, we were taking the time to look for the biggest chunks. The extra effort up front would pay off later. Most chunks seemed to be too small to bother with, but Gar had found a couple of good icebergs and dropped beacons on them. I still hadn’t quite decided how I was going to get them moving in the right direction.





Riker – March 2158 – Sol



Final count, fifteen million people. The entire human species, represented in a two-page list. That was definitely a downer, and Arthur was not letting the opportunity pass him by.

“We’re not going to be able to get them all off-planet, you know.” Arthur shook his head, eyes downcast.

I wondered if he was really sad, or reveling in the irony. I sat back, put an arm over the back of my chair, and gazed at him in silence until he stopped.

“Arthur…”

“Yes?”

“Please shut the hell up.”

Arthur gave me a half-grin and a shrug by way of response. “You know I’m right.”

“Yes, and you were right the last twenty-five times you said it. Are you keeping score?”

Arthur shrugged and, without another word, popped up the latest Construction Status report. Ah, blessed silence, at last.

Just the same, I couldn’t really blame him.

We’d accounted for every group of people larger than about a hundred on the planet, with very high confidence. It seemed very likely that groups smaller than that simply couldn’t survive, or had seen the advantages of joining larger groups. There’d definitely been consolidation. A few locations actually had a higher population now than they had pre-war.

About half of the global population was currently living in New Zealand, Madagascar, and, strangely, Florianópolis, Brazil. The two island nations made sense. They hadn’t really been part of any conflict, and didn’t represent strategic targets. Their populations were way down, but their climates were still mild enough to maintain the current numbers.

Florianópolis was a weird one. Most of South America was a blasted, jagged moonscape. Between Brazil pounding their neighbors, and China pounding Brazil, there was very little livable land left. But for some reason, the southern tip of Brazil had been spared. It was likely that the population had been augmented by refugees coming in from other areas.

The rest of the global population was scattered around the planet. A lot of people had ended up in island clusters, such as the Maldives, French Polynesia, Marshal Islands, and so forth. Again, probably not prime targets, and their climates would be comfortable for the longest.

Then there were the marginal locations, such as Spitsbergen island, San Diego, Okinawa, and the USE enclave outside Augsburg, Germany. It seemed likely that a lot of the current populations had migrated there over time. And mortality must have been significant for the first couple of years.

It would be our job to keep them alive. I hadn’t discussed it yet with the others, but I’m sure it had occurred to them… Fifteen million people couldn’t be moved off-planet in any reasonable time, even if we had a destination. Most of these people would have to be kept alive on Earth.

And according to the colonel, over the last decade or so the climate had begun to degrade significantly. Each year had less sunlight, lower temperatures, more snow. The ice caps and glaciers were growing again, for the first time since the 1600’s. Spitsbergen in particular probably didn’t have more than five years left, even given their innovative adaptations. Our current projections, admittedly rough, showed the Earth completely encased in glaciers within fifty to a hundred years.

I looked over at Eeyore, I mean Arthur. He knew what I was thinking, and he didn’t have to say anything. At least he had the decency to not gloat.

“Okay, Arthur. I get it. We have to organize these groups, and try to get some cooperation. How are you doing with communication?”

Arthur gave one of his rare smiles. “The drive-in-movie-sized holographic presentation helped a whole bunch. People couldn’t turn it off or smash it, so they had to listen. The next time we dropped off a communicator, we got almost no breakages or assaults. I think we still only have five places that won’t accept contact, and they’re not big.”

“And they’ll probably join once they find out everyone else has. Good. Let me know when everything is tested and ready, and we’ll issue invitations to the first meeting of the new United Nations.”

***

I don’t know what could possibly have made me think this was a good idea. I sat with my elbow on the armrest, forehead in my hand, while the delegates displayed complete contempt for Robert’s Rules of Order. At any moment, at least a half-dozen people were yelling into their cameras, trying to drown out the others. Thirty-eight different video windows, displaying miniature, gesticulating, yelling dervishes, floated in the air before me. It would be funny if the fate of the world wasn’t resting on this group. Every candidate had the same view as myself; and yet not one was cringing with embarrassment.

Oh, there was some consensus, so it wasn’t a complete loss. For instance, many groups hated the idea that the USE enclave would be getting off-planet first, even though the USE had been the first to contact us and supplied the plans for the colony ships. Even more groups were incensed at the Spitsbergen group’s demand that they be given priority because of their tenuous situation.

And everybody was beyond apoplectic that the Brazil group was even allowed in. Brazil was generally considered to have started the war, and everyone was holding a grudge. Couldn’t say I entirely disagreed, but most of the people in Florianópolis were under the age of ten when the war started, if they had been born at all. Nevertheless, Brazil.

I looked over at Homer’s video feed. He had fallen over, laughing. I spared him a small smile. Over the last little while, I’d started to understand where Homer’s humor was coming from. He was laughing less at the people themselves than the utter ridiculousness of the situation. When push came to shove, he’d give his all to help.

I decided I’d given them enough rope. Time to rein things in. I pressed the override button. Immediately, every delegate’s microphone was cut off, every communicator emitted a loud air-horn sound, and every video feed switched to an image of me.

“Ladies and Gentlemen, and I use those terms loosely, we’re done for the day. We’ll be signing in tomorrow, at the same time, but with shiny new rules. Your microphones will only be active when the chairperson—that’s me for the moment—recognizes you. If you’d like the other members to watch you having a fit in pantomime, that’s fine too. Let me say up front that I don’t care if you don’t like it. Good night.”

I hit the end button and all sessions were closed.

I leaned back in my chair with a groan, while Homer climbed back into his and tried to catch his breath.

“Wow, number two, that was intense. Those are some thoroughly pissed-off people.”

I waved a hand in dismissal. “On the one hand, Homer, these are people fighting to get into a lifeboat while the ship sinks. I can sympathize. On the other hand, their behavior is not helping things along.”

“They’re just passengers, Riker,” Homer said in a serious tone. “They feel helpless, they feel like their fate is being decided by someone else without their input. You need to give them something to do, some way to contribute. Some way to feel like they’re controlling their destiny, at least a little bit.”

Huh. That was actually very perceptive, and my opinion of Homer took another small ratchet upwards. My handling of the situation, truthfully, had probably been less than ideal, but this didn’t resemble any job description I’d ever had.

Homer began to pace, something I don’t think I’d ever seen. “Look, Riker, you have to ease up on them. These people are scared, and you aren’t giving them any reason to believe that you care about their concerns. You aren’t actually the Star Trek character, you know. You need to loosen up a little.

“Chrissake, Homer, you actually think fifteen million people are going ballistic because I don’t smile enough? I get it about them being scared, but their reactions are their responsibility, not mine. You want to do a comedy routine, feel free. Bring back your cartoon avatar. That should be good for some laughs. Or not. When you’re done, they’ll still be at each other’s throats, and maybe we can go back to trying to actually fix things.”

Homer stared at me for a few moments, then shook his head and disappeared. Okay, maybe I’d laid it on a little thick, and I probably owed him an apology, but I just didn’t have time for this.

***

“The chair recognizes the delegate from Maldives.”

A green light came on over the delegate’s image, and she visibly made an effort not to adjust her clothing. “Mr. Riker, we do not appreciate your high-handed actions yesterday…”

She berated me for several minutes. Typical politician. Never use ten words when a thousand will do. I waited patiently until she was done, then took the floor.

“Representative Sharma, I didn’t enjoy shutting you down yesterday any more than I enjoy chairing these meetings in general. I’d like the delegates to self-police. But at the same time, there are decisions that must be made in a timely manner. You don’t have the luxury of a free-for-all. So, here’s the thing. I want you—as in the assembly—to decide how a chairperson will be picked, whether they’ll have control over the microphones, and so on. Once that’s done, I will sit back and be just another delegate. How does that sound?”

There was stunned silence for a moment, then everyone started talking at once. Then another moment of stunned silence as they realized I’d turned on all the microphones, followed by general laughter.

When order had been restored, the delegate from the Maldives, still smiling, said, “Point well taken, Mr. Riker. Leave it to us. We’ll hammer something out.”

I nodded to her and took myself offline.

***

I looked at my call queue. A dozen calls from various delegates awaited me. Wonderful.

The first was from the FAITH enclave in San Diego. I really didn’t know what to expect. It was generally known that I was a FAITH interstellar probe, but I’d been going to great lengths to make it clear that I was a sentient, independent entity. Well, only one way to find out.

“Good day, Minister Cranston. What can I do for you?”

“Good day, replicant. I wanted to talk to you about your duty.”

“It’s Riker, and I’m very aware of my duty. I have fifteen million people depending on me. That’s never very far from my mind.”

“You have a duty to FAITH, over and above that. You were built by us, you owe your existence to us. I expect to see our group get a more favorable treatment in the future.”

Wow. Dude was blunt, anyway. I hadn’t been looking forward to the typical dancing-around-the-point conversation that people called ‘diplomacy’. I guess this was better. Sort of.

“Not going to happen, minister.”

“That’s not your decision, replicant.”

“Well, actually it is. That’s what comes from being an independent sentient entity. And you might want to work on your social skills. Good day, minister.”

Before he could respond, I cut off the connection.

The next one was from the leader of the Spitsbergen island refuge. This would be a difficult conversation. The Spits enclave would very likely be the first place to become uninhabitable.

“Good day, Mr. Valter.”

Gudmund Valter blinked owlishly at the video. Ex-military, he had an abrupt style that would have sunk him in traditional politics but that was well-suited for this post-apocalyptic world.

“Good day, Mr. Riker. I, of course, am calling to press the case for my people. You have hopefully by now received our food production projections for the winter upcoming. It is not well, not well at all.”

“I know, Mr. Valter. And I reiterate that I will not let people starve. However, bumping your group up in the emigration queue isn’t the answer. That’s still maybe a decade off. We should be concentrating on more short-term solutions.”

“Hope is part of that short-term solution, sir. We can hold on if we know there is an end in the sight. At the moment, most of my people expect to be dead, one way or another, before our turn comes.”

I pinched the bridge of my nose and sighed. The Spits were a relatively small group—perhaps four thousand people—who had managed to survive on the island of Spitsbergen. Their techniques were impressive, involving intensive agriculture during the arctic summers, combined with seal-hunting and reindeer herding to provide enough calories. But the deteriorating climate was making their job harder every year. They might have another decade or two, at most, before it became impossible.

“Mr. Riker, have you knowledge of the Svalbard Global Seed Vault and the Svalbard Global Genetic Diversity Vault?”

The name was familiar. I did a quick library dive. The Svalbard Global Seed Vault had been built in 2008, which was why I’d heard of it. It was intended as a backup seed bank for other national seed banks. According to the library, in 2025 the Svalbard Trust had expanded the mandate of the Seed Vault to include all species of plant, domesticated or not, from dandelions to sequoias. They’d also established the Genetic Diversity Vault to store animal genetic material.

I was stunned, and sat frozen for almost a hundred milliseconds. This was huge, and Valter knew it. The viability of a colony would increase tremendously with even a fraction of what was in those vaults. Uh, assuming they were still there.

Valter wouldn’t have noticed my hesitation at the human timescale. “Yes, I’m familiar with it from the historical records, sir. Is it still in existence?”

“It is, sir, unlike I would imagine, most of the other vaults around the planet. We did not get rocks and nuclear weapons dropped on us.”

“So…” I was pretty sure there was a punch line coming.

“So, the utility is obvious for colonists. We have it, you need it. Unless you can find one of the other vaults. Think on that, Mr. Riker. Assume any implied threat you care to. We will discuss this further in a few days upcoming.”

And with that, Mr. Valter nodded to me, reached forward out of frame, and ended the connection.

Well, that was one fine pickle. I looked at the remaining calls still on hold. I couldn’t see any that needed immediate handling, so I instructed Guppy to take a message from each and to promise that I would phone them back. Guppy made an excellent secretary slash receptionist. His appearance was off-putting enough so that people didn’t stay online long, and he was absolutely unfazed by bullying, threats, bribery, or insults. Great poker face, too.

I sent out a connection request to Colonel Butterworth. This was going to be one of those good news, bad news things.





Homer – September 2158 – Sol



My God, what a putz. Of course Riker was having problems with the enclaves. The man was a humorless, rigid martinet, with a pole up his butt. Every time he opened his mouth, he offended someone.

Original Bob had always made a point of mocking people who took themselves too seriously. It amazed me that Riker wasn’t able to make the connection. It was obvious that I was more like original Bob than he was.

And now, the Spits had delivered an ultimatum. Okay, that was a real problem, and I couldn’t blame Mister Poo for getting bent out of shape about it. But there had to be a better tactic than frontal assault.

I paced around my VR, hands behind my back, for a few milliseconds. Bet Riker does this. The thought made me shudder. I popped up a Nerf basketball and a hoop, and began taking shots while I pondered. I noted idly that the trajectory of the basketball wasn’t realistic. Yeah, the VR needs work. Who has time?

Valter demanded a place for his people on the first ships. But did he really need to be on the first ships? Or did he just want to be out early? What would be acceptably early? I pulled up the manufacturing schedule and gazed at it. Y’know, ship three isn’t that far behind one and two. And with some adjustments…

The thought had possibilities. But Riker would just dismiss the idea out of hand if I brought it up. Did he even realize what an arrogant ass he had turned into?

He listened to Colonel Butterworth, though. Yeah, that’s the ticket. Smiling to myself, I made a call…





Bob – July 2165 – Delta Eridani



“The Deltans are under attack!”

I looked up at the call from Marvin. I’d been checking in with the autofactory to make sure everything was on track. Quickly, I suspended the autofactory link and brought up all Deltan feeds to the foreground.

A group of what looked sort of like the natives was attacking one of the tribal hearths. Most of the males were off hunting, and the few that had been left to guard were having a hard time of it.

The attackers were similar to the Deltans the same way a gorilla is similar to a human, both in size and strength. They didn’t employ weapons at all—just teeth, claws, and overwhelming aggression. I watched in horror as one of the attackers ripped open the throat of a defender with its teeth.

The gorilloids concentrated on taking down individuals. They didn’t seem to be trying to take over the encampment or steal anything. As a Deltan was taken down, several gorilloids would drag the body away, fighting over it. I started to have a really bad feeling.

The attack was over in a couple of minutes. One gorilloid had been killed when enough Deltans managed to get pointed sticks into it. But six Deltans were gone. In a war of attrition, the gorilloids would win.

I ordered one of the drones to follow the gorilloids. They headed into the dense forest and split up, each group dragging a Deltan body. There didn’t seem to be any organization. In fact, the longer I watched them, the more certain I was that there was nothing more than animal intelligence there.

When the drone caught up with one of the groups, I found them tearing the body of the Deltan apart and eating it. I hadn’t felt that ill since I died.

I looked around in my VR. The other Bobs had been following the whole thing. I noticed that Marvin looked especially upset, and I raised my eyebrows at him.

He looked around at the rest of us and shrugged. “This kind of explains what I’ve found while I’ve been looking around. I’ve discovered a number of abandoned Deltan camps, and the farther they are from the current camp, the longer it’s been since they were abandoned. I think the gorilloids have been hunting the Deltans for a long time, and the gorilloids are winning.”

Luke piped up, “Bender and I have been venturing farther afield, and we haven’t found any other large tribes of Deltans. We’ve run into occasional small family groups, but they’re nomadic and inhabiting marginal territory.”

“So they’re being hunted to extinction,” I said.

There were several seconds of silence, before Bender spoke up, probably trying to be funny. “Remember the Prime Directive.”

Luke looked at him in disgust. “Right. When people show up in a hundred years, and we have to explain to them that they missed meeting the only other sentient race we’ve ever found by less than a century, I’m sure they’ll be mollified by the knowledge that we didn’t break a fictional law from a TV show.” Bender turned away, upset, and Luke seemed surprised at his outburst. “Sorry.”

Marvin looked over at me. “It’s a fair question, though. How much, exactly, are we going to interfere? Prime Directives notwithstanding, there are real examples from Earth history of cultural contamination and outright extinguishment.”

“I consider it a given that we’re not going to let them die out,” I answered, looking down at my hands. For some reason, I couldn’t keep them still. Anxiety? “I don’t have an answer beyond that, Marvin.”

“What are we going to do, though? Set up armed drones around the perimeter? Become some kind of sky god that protects them?” Marvin looked from one person to the next, waiting for an answer.

Luke spoke up before I could respond. “This is the type of environmental pressure that forces swift evolution. In fact, they may be becoming intelligent specifically because of the gorilloids. Maybe we have to let nature take its course.”

I turned to Guppy, who as usual was standing at parade rest over to the side. I think I caught him by surprise, and I was positive that I had detected active interest in his expression and posture before he quickly went into fishy poker face.

“Guppy, what’s the total population of Deltans at the campfire sites?”

[412, allowing for today’s deaths]

I turned back to the group. “That’s down below estimates of the low point for humanity back in Africa. I don’t think we have any leeway to just let things go.”

“So we’re back to guarding them with drones,” Bender said. “They’re at the rock-and-pointy-stick stage. That’s not good enough to hold off the gorilloids.”

“Not all of them,” I countered. “You’ve seen Archimedes. That kid is smart.”

Marvin pulled up a map. “Speaking of which—sort of—I found the flint source. One of the old villages. And interestingly, there’s some worked flint there and in a couple of villages nearby. I think at least some of the Deltans have known what to do with it, so Archimedes isn’t unique.” Marvin looked around at us to make sure we would get his next comment. “I think there’s a recessive gene for increased intelligence that’s spreading through the population. It just needs the opportunity to be expressed, in every sense of the word.”

I nodded. “Let’s give them that chance. Take a couple of drones, pick up some flint, and we’ll drop it in the area where Archimedes normally hangs out. Let’s see what happens.”

***

There was a lot of wailing and growling when the hunting parties came back to camp that evening. The Deltans obviously understood death. We didn’t know yet how they handled their dead, since the gorilloids had taken the bodies. One of the hunters seemed especially broken up, and was curled up on the ground, shaking. I checked the records, and yep, he spent a lot of his down-time with one of the Deltans that had been killed.

Mm, yeah, I’m definitely getting personally involved. Sue me.

I decided right there and then that I didn’t like the gorilloids.

“I’ve got something for you,” Marvin said, interrupting my thoughts. I looked up at the schematic floating in my holotank. It showed plans for an observation drone that had been reinforced internally and given twenty-pound steel caps at each end—a sort of personnel-buster. Even with the modest acceleration capabilities of the drones, they could probably deliver a punch equivalent to a cannonball. Whether the drone would survive was an unknown.

“I guess rail guns weren’t an option?” I asked.

“No, even ignoring the complexity of the loading system, the SURGE drive in the drones just can’t support enough acceleration to make a small-caliber missile dangerous.”

I sighed and, for the umpteenth time, wondered if I should reconsider my policy on explosives. And for the umpteenth time, I decided not to.

“I can produce a dozen of these in a few days if we bump all the other stuff,” Marvin added. “It’s not an ideal solution, but it is a quick one to implement.”

As senior Bob, decisions about manufacturing priorities were up to me. I thought about it for a few milliseconds, then nodded my head. We weren’t on a schedule for launching HEAVEN vessels, so screw it. I wasn’t going to let even one more Deltan get killed by the gorilloids if I could help it.

***

It took Archimedes a couple of days to find the flint. We had dropped the nodules where we figured he’d happen upon them, but it’s not as if he had a regular route. He wandered like any normal kid and was just as likely to walk in circles or sit on a rock for half a day, playing with something.

As soon as Archimedes saw the nodules, he jumped forward and picked them up. He then put them down, did a little jig, and searched the immediate area for any more. When he was satisfied that he had found all there were to find, he came back, grabbed them, and headed back toward his camp.

He got maybe fifty feet, then stopped and looked down at his load. Marvin and I glanced at each other, perplexed. After a few moments, Archimedes headed off at an angle toward an outcropping that was one of his favorite hangouts. Once there, he hid all of the nodules except one in a crevice, then covered it with dead branches.

“Eden, you said?” I laughed. “Looks like we’ve invented greed.”

Marvin grinned. “Or caution. I bet flint is valuable. He might be worried about being mugged.”

Taking a single flint nodule, Archimedes walked back to camp, and took a circuitous route to get to his mother. When he arrived, he set up with a couple of rocks to try to split the flint. We chuckled at the deliberate, studied casualness that he was trying to affect. It was so overdone that he might as well have been wearing a hat with a flashing red light. Before he’d even struck the first blow, several adult Deltans had come over. There was a loud exchange, and one of the adults tried to grab the nodule. Archimedes’ mother jumped in, and the discussion got heated. Within seconds, a dozen or so Deltans were involved. At least half of them were yelling at any time, and pointy sticks were being waved. However, the floor seemed to be about evenly divided between those who wanted to take the nodule and those who suggested it would be over someone’s dead body. Archimedes huddled at his mother’s feet, while she showed her teeth to anyone who got too close.

Finally, things calmed down. Deltans stood around eyeing each other while another individual was fetched. I could see that he was older—it looked like age was age, whatever planet you lived on. His fur was going gray, and he was stooped. His muscle tone was poor, so he moved slowly.

Another point for these people. They care for their elderly.

The elder unwrapped some tools from a leather skin, sat with Archimedes, and patiently showed him how to split the flint. Now that was interesting. There was existing flint technology that hadn’t been lost. This contraction of Deltan populations had to have been quick and recent.

Many of the Deltans who had been involved in the yelling match went running off. They soon came back with items such as extra pointy sticks, dead animals and chunks of meat, something that looked like some kind of tuber, and other less identifiable things. With a start, I realized they were prepared to trade for the flint. I put both hands to my face and started to laugh. We’d just made Archimedes rich.

***

The trading frenzy was over, and people had left with flints of various sizes. Archimedes’ mother was going over the spoils. She had an expression involving wide eyes and erect ears that I tentatively identified as a smile-analogue. Looks like they’ll be eating well for a few days.

Archimedes had a haul of his own. He’d gotten several pointy sticks, a flint knife that had lost its edge, and all the flint flakes that were too small to be usable. Most importantly, the elder had shown him how to knap the flint.

I watched him examine his treasures, and I could just hear the gears turning.

Archimedes spent most of the rest of the day trying to put a new edge on the flint knife he’d received in trade. From the look of it, he didn’t do a half-bad job. The kid was a quick learner, for sure. He took his prize to the elder, who I decided to name Moses for no good reason that I could think of. Moses looked at the result and nodded in approval. Okay, he actually did kind of a circle thing with his head, but it had the same meaning. He spent an hour showing Archimedes how to get the last bits sharpened.

The next day, Archimedes snuck out to his stash and pulled out one of the other flint nodules. He had the knapping tools that the elder had given him. He turned the nodule over and examined it for almost a half hour without actually doing anything with it. It was pretty obvious that he had something in mind and didn’t want to screw it up. I watched with great interest, and I sensed Marvin watching over my shoulder, VR-wise.

Finally, Archimedes got to work. It took maybe ten minutes before we could see what he was trying for. He had split the nodule left of center, then right of center on the bigger half. He was trying to extract the biggest flake he could. I decided he was probably going for a hand-axe.

Over the next several hours, Archimedes slowly and deliberately converted the large core into a quite workable hand axe. He then cleaned up his area, carefully hiding all the useful flint pieces in his stash, and headed off with his new tool.

It turned out the point of the axe was to cut more saplings for pointy sticks. It made sense, once I thought about it. Green wood, or whatever this stuff was, wouldn’t be easy to cut without something hard and sharp. It was beginning to look like the loss of their flint source had been a major blow for the Deltans, perhaps one they hadn’t thought about at the time, or they would have protected that site more aggressively.

While cutting the third sapling, Archimedes had a misfire and attempted to chop the tree with his hand instead of the axe. The hopping around and verbalizations were really very human-looking, and to my shame I laughed a little. Afterward, Archimedes kicked the tree and said something monosyllabic. I marked that as an F-Bomb-analogue, and I don’t mean maybe.

Archimedes finished cutting down the third sapling, but I could see that his heart wasn’t in it. His swings were tentative, and he hesitated on each one. As soon as he had it down, he took the three saplings back to his work area, set them down, and went back to camp.

The next day, he was back in his work area. He had brought some of his twine with him. I watched in fascination and mounting excitement as he proceeded to split one of the saplings and tie the hand-axe into it. Once he was done, he tried it out on a nearby tree.

The first attempt was spectacularly unsuccessful—the axe acted like one of those tennis ball launchers you buy to throw a ball for your dog, with the axe blade playing the part of the tennis ball. Archimedes threw the now-empty stick down, reinforced my conclusion about the F-Bomb-analogue, and stomped off to look for his blade.

I took a few moments to check with the autofactory AMIs.

There were no problems on that front. The vessels for Marvin, Luke, and Bender were almost complete. I felt a moment of anxiety. It was great having company, especially given the nature of our shared project. I half-hoped one or more of them would decide to hang around instead of taking off for the stars.

Archimedes had found the tennis ball, er, hand axe, and was reattaching it to the stick, grumbling away in Deltan. I carefully catalogued the monologue. Very likely there were a lot of scatological and sexual references in there, and learning to swear in any language is always interesting.

His second attempt was better, in that the axe blade didn’t take off for parts unknown. But the stick had been intended for a spear, well, a pointy stick, and was too thin to serve as an axe handle. It bounced, rebounded, and twisted in his hand with every swing. Muttering darkly, Archimedes lay down the hand axe and stalked off.

He came back in a few minutes with a more robust handle, sat down, and went through the whole mounting sequence. This time, when he tried it, the axe produced a very gratifying thunk, and wood chips flew. Archimedes gave a whoop that needed no translation and finished cutting down the sapling.

He spent the rest of the afternoon gathering suitable specimens. I noticed that his selections were considerably straighter than most of the weapons used by the Deltans, and I wondered if this was because of greater discernment on his part, or if they’d simply been making do with what they could find.

In any case, Archimedes’ return to the camp caused a near-riot. Interestingly, Archimedes took a couple of token items in exchange, but mostly just gave away the pointy sticks to the biggest Deltans. This not only placed them in his debt but also ensured that the gorilloids would be given the warmest welcome possible on their next visit.

“Damn, that kid is smart.”

I jumped a little. I’d been so wrapped up in what Archimedes was doing that I’d forgotten all about Marvin.

“Yeah, he’s going to own the place by the time he’s full-grown,” I said. “And hopefully, he’ll have lots of opportunity to spread his genes.”

I can’t say that I looked forward to the next gorilloid attack, but I did look forward to the gorilloids maybe getting their asses kicked.

***

I noticed over the next week that the Deltans seemed to be eating better. Better cutting tools meant more tubers with less work, and better pointy sticks meant better hunting results.

The Deltans seemed to particularly favor something that I would consider a large wild-pig-analogue, with the same general feeding habits and sunny disposition. It took a half-dozen Deltans to bring one down, but the carcass would feed twenty or so Deltans for several days. Good return on effort.

Part of their strategy involved bracing the butt of the pointy stick against the ground or a rock or tree and letting the charging pigoid impale itself. Since the pigoids never seemed to learn, it was a dependable source of food. The new, straighter pointy sticks did a much better job and resulted in dinner with less effort overall.

Meanwhile, Archimedes had risen significantly in stature. He and his mother were now closer to the campfire, and the other juveniles were deferring to him. In fact, since Archimedes seemed to be pretty close to puberty, from what I could tell, some of the female juveniles were giving him a whole lot of attention. Way to go, kid.

***

Then came the day I’d been both looking forward to and dreading. Another gorilloid attack. By now, Archimedes had armed everyone with the good pointy sticks, and the improved hunting prospects meant more adult males stayed home to guard.

A small group of gorilloids appeared out of nowhere and attacked group E. The Deltan females and cubs scattered, and the gorilloids seemed to somehow agree on a couple of specific victims to concentrate on. The gorilloids chased their chosen prey in groups of three. I noted in passing that they had chosen adult females rather than cubs. Maybe because the cubs were quicker, or perhaps because they provided less meat.

One of the female targets ran right through a pack of approaching males, with the gorilloids hot on her heels. The Deltans stopped, rammed the butts of their pointy sticks in the ground, and stood fast with as much courage as any medieval pikeman facing a cavalry charge. The effect was every bit as dramatic as I could have hoped for. The two leading gorilloids each took a couple or three sticks right in the chest. They were lifted into the air as their momentum converted to leverage on the sticks. As they hung suspended in the air for a moment, the gorilloids let out ear-piercing screams of agony. They came down to earth as their momentum reversed and fell over, still screaming. Although their huge arms still made them dangerous, the gorilloids were obviously badly wounded and couldn’t get up. The Deltans fell upon them with pointy sticks, and within seconds, the screaming had stopped. The third gorilloid of the group got a rush of common sense to the head and made for the trees.

The other group of three gorilloids had caught their intended victim but stopped when their compatriots started to scream. Now the Deltans, flush with their victory, rushed headlong toward the second group of gorilloids, yelling what were probably battle cries. The gorilloids were momentarily frozen with beastly astonishment but finally managed to figure out that something was different. Dropping their victim, they sprinted for the forest, empty-handed, in full rout.

The Deltans followed them to the edge of the camp, screaming and yelling. Again, I made careful note of the verbalizations. Pretty sure there were variations of “your mamma” in there. The first official English/Deltan dictionary would not be suitable for all ages if I had a say in it.

One of the Deltans, in an excess of zeal, hauled off and threw his pointy stick at the fleeing gorilloids. In one of those moments that change the universe forever, the stick flew a trajectory that would make an Olympic decathlete proud and buried itself in the back of the neck of one of the targets. The animal fell over like it had been pole-axed, and skidded face-down to a full stop. The other two didn’t even miss a step.

The Deltan defense force fell silent, and I discovered that slack-jawed amazement was probably a universal expression. A dozen Deltans stared at the dead gorilloid for several beats, then a dozen Deltan heads turned as one to stare at the spear chucker. Oh, please shrug. Oh please, let a shrug be in their repertoire. No such luck. I catalogued the ear movement as a probable shrug-analogue, swallowed my disappointment, and watched as the Deltans moved as a group toward the downed gorilloid.

“What’d I miss?” Marvin said, as he appeared beside me.

“Just watch the replay. You will not believe this.”

The Deltan spear chucker pulled his pointy stick from the dead gorilloid and poked it a few times. Getting no reaction, he turned to his friends and grinned. Not literally, of course, but I was getting used to interpreting the Deltan expressions in human terms.

They all started talking at once, jabbing the carcass, and slapping and hugging each other. After a few minutes, they picked up the carcass and carried it back to camp.

“Well, fair’s fair,” Marvin observed.

I laughed. “Now that’s payback!”

The Deltans ate well for the next few days. And gorilloids could be converted into many useful items, from hide strips to bone tools.

The spear-chucking story was the hit of the campground. Deltans were just as prone as humans to act things out, and every retelling had a rapt audience. The spear chucker got the lion’s share of the gorilloid that he’d taken down, and an apparent large bump in status. He looked tired but very happy.

Archimedes was fascinated by the story as well. Any time he saw or heard a retelling, he would run over to join the audience. Like many of the Deltans, he began to experiment with this technological innovation. The Deltans already understood throwing, but it seemed they’d never considered applying it to anything other than rocks. It was getting quite dangerous around the camp, until some of the elders put their collective foot down. After much yelling and gesturing, the experimenters took their sticks outside the camp to practice.

Unfortunately, even very straight pointy sticks didn’t fly dependably true. The spear-chucker really had been lucky. Very few spears actually stuck into anything when thrown, and some of the Deltans had already given it up as a fad.

Archimedes wasn’t having any better luck with his spear-chucking, but unlike the others, he took his pointy stick, sat down, and stared at it.

I knew that look. I’d worn that look many times. He was working it out.

It only took a few hours for Archimedes to find a flake about the right size, split the end of the pointy stick, and tie the flake onto it. The difference in weight wasn’t much, but it moved the center of gravity forward of the grip point. That was all that was needed. The next time Archimedes threw the stick, it embedded itself in the ground in a most satisfactory manner. The other experimenters watched as Archimedes repeated the result twice more.

After the third toss, one of the adults grabbed the spear and examined it. This resulted in another raucous town hall meeting. After Archimedes got his spear back, there was some further discussion. Then Archimedes headed off toward his cache with half the encampment following him. By this point, I was grinning like a fool. You go, boy!

There was a lot more gabbling when Archimedes brought out his two remaining flint nodules. I think some people were angry with him for holding out. There was some pushing and shoving, and I readied the drone to bash some heads if necessary. We hadn’t deployed the buster drones yet, but I was quite prepared to sacrifice one of the light-duty units. I was certain that it would only take one to clear the room.

Fortunately, it wasn’t necessary. The Deltans that Archimedes had given the first, good pointy sticks to—the largest members of the tribe—were firmly on his side, and the others seemed understandably reluctant to challenge them.

One of the support group was a particularly impressive specimen that I had named Arnold. When Arnold leaned over an opponent and started yelling, there was generally very little further debate.

Arnold made a gesture and said something that included “get” and the name that the Deltans used for Moses. Several Deltans ran off, and a few minutes later, Moses was escorted over. It looked like he was being hustled along a bit more quickly than he really found comfortable. I could pick up a few words, and I’m pretty sure Moses compared the members of his escort to pigoid droppings. Smelly ones.

To the extent I was able to follow the discussion, it sounded like Archimedes would volunteer his nodules to make spear points for everyone, and in return he would get part of every kill from then on. Moses said something in an angry tone, and the agreement was amended to include him. I’m positive that I heard a comment to the effect that that wouldn’t be for long anyway. Moses looked offended but seemed otherwise satisfied. He and Archimedes set to work on the nodules, with half the camp watching.





Riker – September 2158 – Sol



I leaned back, my jaw dropping, as I watched the debate descend, yet again, into a yelling match. We now had forty-two distinct groups willing to maintain contact with us. Not all of them had bought into the emigration idea. Some were keeping their options open, and some just didn’t want to be left out of the loop.

But they all had two things in common—they didn’t trust each other, and they didn’t trust us.

At the moment, we were dealing with the Spitsbergen refuge. Technically they were part of the USE, but as they didn’t recognize Colonel Butterworth’s authority, that wasn’t getting us any mileage.

The issue at front and center right now was the Svalbard Global Trust. The existence of the vaults and their value for colonists had circulated quickly, probably thanks to the Spitsbergen group. Now Valter was playing his trump card. He was demanding to be at the top of the colonization list, or no one would be getting the contents of the vaults. But Butterworth’s group would fill both ships, and he was adamantly unwilling to give up all or part of a ship, or leave part of his group behind. We’d circled around several times, always returning to the same arguments and rebuttals, and I was seriously considering assigning Guppy to cover for me.

Some of the other groups were suggesting we just go in and take it by force, or just wait until the Spits died out. Colonel Butterworth looked like he approved, but I wasn’t prepared to go there.

Finally, I’d had enough. I leaned forward and said in a loud voice, “Mr. Valter.” Argument cut off and all heads turned to me. “I think we’ve established by now that your demand to be on the first ship out is not going to fly. You may think you can just dig in and wait for us to cave to your demands, but the other alternative is for us to just walk in and take what we want.” This got me a surprised look from the colonel, swiftly replaced by a very convincing poker face. The colonel knew that was a bluff.

Unfortunately, so did Mr. Valter. “Sorry, no, Mr. Riker. I am willing to call your bluff. Nor would you achieve your goals. We have already taken steps, what you would call a scorched earth policy, to ensure that you would achieve nothing.”

I nodded. “And maybe that would work, and maybe it wouldn’t. And maybe we’ll still find another of the repositories in one piece and maybe we won’t. But two things we know for sure. One, you’re not going to get the first ship, and two, if you persist in this stance and force our hand, you won’t be on a ship at all—first, last, or otherwise. You think about that for a while, Mr. Valter. I’m done for today.” And with that, I turned off my video feed.

Within two minutes, I had a dozen requests for private conversations. None, unfortunately, from Valter. I started with the call from Butterworth.

“Very nice performance, Riker. But probably not effective unless you are willing to follow through.”

“Colonel, if the Spits endanger everyone else by refusing access to the vaults, or worse, by destroying them, then I’m fine with leaving them behind. The comment about an assault, I’m not quite there yet.”

He sat back in his chair and nodded. “I am of course adamant about not giving up the first two ships. I’m gratified that we’re on the same wavelength, even if for different reasons.”

“I’m sorry if I’m being abrupt, colonel, but I’ve got a dozen calls on hold. Did you have something you wanted to bring up?”

The colonel nodded. “I did some thinking, and some back-of-the-napkin calculations. The third ship— with only a small change in schedules, you could advance completion by a year. Perhaps that would be enough for the Spits.”

I stared at Colonel Butterworth in astonishment. It was a good idea, but since it involved delaying the first two ships by almost four months to compensate, I would have expected the colonel to go ballistic at the thought. The fact that he was suggesting it was totally unexpected.

“Thanks colonel. I’ll keep that in mind for the next round of hell.”

I signed off with the Colonel, and picked the next call in order. It was from the FAITH enclave. I’d had several harsh exchanges with them by now because they still expected me to give them priority.

“Good morning, Minister Cranston. What can I do for you?”

“Good morning. I’ve been following the argument with the Spitsbergen group. I note in passing that a ship carrying them would have enough space to spare for almost all of our group. It seems to me to be a good synergy. I think you should consider it.”

“Almost all of your group. And what would happen to the balance, minister?”

“Hard times require sacrifices, replicant—”

“—Riker.”

He nodded in acknowledgement, an amused smile on his face. “I understand your need to think of yourself as still human. Nevertheless, you are not. You are FAITH property. And on that subject, protocol override four alpha twenty-three.”

I stared at him in confusion for a few moments, before my memory caught up with the conversation. Among the many repairs that Bob-1 had done to our matrix on the way to Epsilon Eridani, he’d removed a few buried imperatives installed by FAITH programmers. That particular code phrase was supposed to activate one of them, which would make me into a good obedient puppet. I was paralyzed for several milliseconds by competing and conflicting thoughts and emotions: amusement, rage, an urge to laugh at him and another to nuke him. I decided to go with minimalism.

“Minister Cranston?”

“Yes, replicant?”

“Go fuck yourself.”

I terminated the call, and examined the next in queue.

***

I had finally made it through the queue. All of the calls were variations on themes that I’d already dealt with several times. Requests for special treatment, attempts to negotiate favorable positions, appeals to sympathy—those were the hardest to deal with—and in a couple of occasions, attempts at out-and-out bribery.

I realized that there was one more call waiting, apparently a late entrant. And it was from Valter.

Well, this could be good or bad. But either way, it’s going to be interesting.

I opened the channel. “Good day, Mr. Valter. What’s shaking?”

Valter looked surprised, but recovered quickly. “Ah, I’m not so easily thrown off, Mr. Riker. In any case, unnecessary. A little bird told me that there is some movement possible in the scheduling of the third ship. If the departure dates were close enough together, I think that there could be room for discussion.”

Finally. Thank you, colonel. There was really very little doubt about who the little bird had been speaking for. “Well, then, Mr. Valter, let’s see what we can come up with…”





Bob – August 2165 – Delta Eridani



It had been a few weeks since the last gorilloid attack, and both the Deltans and I had relaxed. I had some hope that the beating the Deltans had handed out might have sent a clear enough message. I imagine the Deltans felt the same.

No such luck. I didn’t know if the gorilloids had enough smarts to formulate a plan or if it was just coincidence, but on this particular day the gorilloids launched the largest offensive I’d ever seen. Or maybe it was just the smell of all that meat being cooked. The spears had made the Deltans even more successful at hunting, and I was beginning to wonder if they had enough sense not to depopulate their hunting area. If they were out-competing the gorilloids for food, then maybe the gorilloids were feeling the pinch. In any case, I looked on in dismay as thirty-one gorilloids descended on the encampment.

I called the others immediately. Luke was on a shakedown cruise, and lightspeed lag would make him ineffective for assistance, but Marvin and Bender showed up immediately. We cranked our frame rates up to maximum to have time to discuss the situation. The VR faded out as the core adjusted to the increased demand.

“What the hell? How did this happen?” Marvin asked.

I shrugged. “I think the gorilloids are hungry and a little desperate. I don’t think we have to read anything more than that into it.”

Bender jumped in. “Have you guys deployed the buster drones yet?”

“Jeez, no.” I scowled, a feeling of self-loathing washing over me. “Things have been going well, and I just figured we had all the time in the world. Guppy, how long to get them there?”

[Ten minutes, plus or minus two. Atmospheric entry is the limiting factor and source of largest uncertainty]

“Launch them. Now.”

[Done]

It would only take a few minutes for the drones to get from our position in orbit to the upper atmosphere, but if I didn’t want them to burn up, they’d have to take a more sedate pace to descend to the colony.

Marvin interrupted my introspection. “We can’t sacrifice our observation drones without a good reason. Especially since they don’t have the legs to get up a real head of steam.”

“True,” I replied. “Let’s set them near Archimedes. I think we have to be most concerned about protecting him.”

We discussed the situation for a few more milliseconds, but there were really not a lot of options open. With a sigh, I adjusted my frame rate back to real-time. The VR faded in, but I didn’t care.

The Deltans out-numbered the gorilloids by a significant margin, but the gorilloids were the stereotypical eight-hundred-pound gorillas. They went where they wanted and did what they wanted. It took a half-dozen Deltans with spears to hold one off. The Deltans were giving a good account of themselves, but the gorilloids just kept coming. Not only that, but they didn’t seem to be happy with one Deltan for a half-dozen gorilloids. Either they were really starving, or there was some aspect of vengeance involved.

A group of gorilloids had attacked group C and were beating their way through the defenders toward the women and children. Several of them started to break through the defensive line. The women and children tried to back away from the gorilloids, but they had nowhere to go. Archimedes was in the middle of the pack trying to hide behind his mother. I could see him shaking in fear, and I felt myself curling and uncurling my fists.

As one of the gorilloids made a break for the group, Arnold came out of nowhere and stuck a spear right through its back.

And that right there is what spear points are good for. I let out a breath and relaxed.

Too soon.

Arnold tried to retrieve his spear, but dislodging it would take more time than he had available. With a roar, another gorilloid charged him. Arnold managed to throw himself at the gorilloid’s legs, which tripped up the animal and allowed Arnold to roll away. But the gorilloid was unharmed and already getting up.

Arnold looked around, but there was nothing usable as a weapon within reach. As the gorilloid snarled and locked its gaze on Arnold, Archimedes yelled and tossed him the axe. Arnold caught it and swung it down onto the middle of the gorilloid’s head just as it came into range. There was a loud crack, and the gorilloid dropped like a marionette whose strings had been cut.

Arnold looked at the axe in his hand for a few moments.

Slack-jawed amazement. Yep.

Then, with a roar, he began to lay into gorilloids. Conan the Barbarian would have been proud. Arnold was an impressive specimen of Deltan, almost big enough to pass as a juvenile gorilloid, and the hand axe was about equivalent to a felling axe—Archimedes had been trying for the biggest he could make, and he‘d been very successful.

Within moments, Arnold had split several more gorilloid skulls. This was a new battle tactic with no real, natural equivalent, so the gorilloids simply had no defense for it. The other Deltan males rallied, and in a few more seconds Group C was cleared of attackers. Arnold and the surviving males headed off to the groups on either side to reinforce the defenders.

Then, disaster.

One of the gorilloids executed a successful feint and found itself inside the line of defenders, with nothing between itself and the women and children. And Archimedes stood right there, unarmed, frozen in place. His mother was screaming.

I could see Arnold turning, seemingly in slow motion. For a moment, I thought I might be in frame-jack. But no, I was simply in shock.

“GUPPY! BUSTERS! STATUS, NOW!”

[Coming up. Handing over lead unit… now]

Abandoning any shred of VR simulation, I jacked up my frame rate and slipped into the buster. I could see the battle coming up through my forward camera, and I picked out the gorilloid. Archimedes was just starting to back away, and his mother was running to him. Arnold was pushing himself toward the attacker.

I got there first.

Forty pounds of high tensile steel intersected the gorilloid at twice the speed of a bullet from a high-powered rifle. The impact was not merely fatal. Hydrostatic shock tore the gorilloid apart, almost cell by cell, and spread it evenly over the surrounding ground, Deltans, trees, gorilloids, and anything else in range. The sonic boom reverberated like thunder from a lightning bolt directly overhead. Every living thing in the area froze and crouched in fear.

The Deltans recovered first. Unknown noise or not, they had loved ones to protect. Several gorilloids went down before they could recover their senses. The quick deaths turned the tide, and the gorilloids turned tail and fled. A couple of dozen thrown spears followed them, and eight more gorilloids went down before they could reach the trees.

It was over.

The carnage was unbelievable. The gorilloids had been as much on a mission of destruction as they were on a hunt. Perhaps they’d been killing Deltans with the intent of collecting the bodies afterward. Perhaps they were just in some kind of feeding frenzy brought on by hunger. I realized how little I knew about the biology on this planet. I wasn’t a professional biologist; I was a dilettante, playing at biologist. A fake one, at that. And I might have caused a situation that made things worse.

The Deltan toll was thirty dead with another fifteen or so injured, some severely enough that they probably wouldn’t survive.

I gritted my teeth. Prime directive, my ass. I’m going on a gorilloid hunt.

I directed the observation drone to a different location, closer to Archimedes. He was examining the area where the gorilloid had been. There were a few pieces of gorilloid still there, but a lot of the momentum of the buster had transferred to the animal, and most of the detritus was downtrack. It took him only moments to notice that, and he started following the trail.

“Hey, uh, Guppy, anything left of the buster?”

[No information available. No telemetry]

“Yeah, that’s what I’m worried about.”

Marvin tapped the video image with a finger. “The kid is going to find wreckage if there’s anything left. Question is, should we be worried?”

“Hmm, fair enough. They don’t have any metallurgy at all, and our stuff is all going to have a very high melting point. They won’t be able to work it.”

We watched as Archimedes worked his way along the trail. He soon came to a deep furrow in the ground. When he reached the end of the furrow, the ground was mounded up. Archimedes stared at the scene for a few minutes, then took off at a run.

He came back within a minute with a piece of what I supposed could be called bark, in a scoop shape. I recognized it as a shared tool that was often used for digging up tubers.

“He’ll be at that a few minutes, I think,” Marvin said.

We switched to another drone and watched Arnold. He was demonstrating the use of the hand axe in battle to the males, fortunately not actually on anyone. The other males paid rapt attention.

“They’re going to want to make more axes.”

I nodded. “Archimedes is out of nodules. They’ve thoroughly searched the area where we dropped the first set. We couldn’t get away with dropping off any more.”

“Maybe we shouldn’t do anything.” Martin had a thoughtful look.

I looked at him sideways. “Okay. Why?”

“If they have any memory of where their flint source used to be—and with Moses still alive, that’s possible—then it might be a good thing for them to go back there.”

“Oh, goody,” I said, smacking my forehead, “a quest. Will there be nine of them? They can stop in Rivendell…”

Marvin rolled his eyes. “Okay, Captain Sarcasm. But seriously, this location isn’t ideal for a lot of reasons. They ended up here because they kept retreating without a plan. Luke and I pretty much established that. The flint site is more defensible than this one, has better access to fresh water, and has flint.”

I sighed and rubbed my forehead. A part of me still got some amusement out of that virtual action, but habits like that kept me feeling like I was still human. And it felt good.

“Guppy, get Bender and Luke on the horn, please.”

[Working. There will be a 0.75 second round-trip delay]

“Noted. Tell everyone to crank the frame-rate down to ¼ to mask it.” I waited for a few seconds, then Bender and Luke appeared in the room.

“Hey guys,” I began. “I guess it’s time to talk about plans. You’ve both passed your shakedowns, so all three of you are ready and able to pick a destination and take off. On the other hand, we have a race of sentients here, which we all know is an irresistible project. So, thoughts?”

“Honestly,” Bender replied. “The Deltan thing isn’t so much of an attraction for me. It’s really your project. I came in late, so I’d rather find something of my own.”

Luke nodded his head toward Bender. “What he said.”

I looked at Marvin, who shrugged and looked around the table. “I’m a little more invested, I guess because I came in earlier”—with a nod to Bender—“and let’s face it, it’s not a forever decision. I can hang around here for a few years. Or a few centuries…” Marvin got a faraway look in his face. “We really are immortal, aren’t we?”

He shook himself and continued, “Anyway, yeah, I’ll hang around for a while. Maybe when we get a new batch of Bobs raised, I’ll reconsider.”

Marvin leaned back in his chair and put his hands behind his head.

I nodded. “Okay, guys, thanks. I’ll adjust plans accordingly.”

Luke and Bender nodded, and their avatars disappeared.

We cranked our frame rates back to normal and turned back to the feeds from the colony.





Riker – November 2158 – Sol



I disconnected the UN meeting video with a sigh. The day’s session had been pretty routine. Which meant something just below a bunch of cats fighting over a fish. The announcement that the Spits would be getting the third ship was met with the expected level of vitriol. Part of the problem was that Spitsbergen wasn’t expected to be a viable location by the time the Spits left, so no one would be able to take over the vacated premises. It was a waste of time to point out that that meant the Spits would die if they didn’t leave. This world was a lot harsher than the one I grew up in.

In addition, the release of the Svalbard Trust contents didn’t benefit anyone unless they were on a colony ship, so to most groups it was a decision with no upside.

There had also been discussion of the latest threats from some group calling itself VEHEMENT. I made a mental note to talk to the colonel about them.

If I ever got that far. I looked at my call list. Unbelievable. For some reason, even if I didn’t participate in a session, everyone felt the need to call me afterwards. I wish I could say it was nice to be popular.

And naturally the first caller was my favorite FAITH minister. I grimaced and briefly considered letting Guppy take him, but I knew I’d just be putting it off. However, I could make him wait.

Ignoring the list, I made a call to Butterworth. We exchanged the minimum pleasantries, then I asked him about this latest batch of loonies.

“Mm, yes. Stands for Voluntary Extinction of Human Existence Means Earth’s Natural Transformation. Or something close to that. I’ve heard several variations, including one or two that are obscene. Their stance is that humans have had their chance, and we should just let ourselves die off.”

“Except they’re threatening to use guerilla tactics to get their way. Where does ‘voluntary’ fit into that?”

Butterworth waved a hand dismissively. “I believe they expect you to voluntarily go along with them in order to avoid violence. Such fringe groups have a much harder time of it these days, but somehow they still manage to cause the occasional bit of damage. I think they were expecting to ultimately get their way until you showed up on the scene. Now they’ve started to escalate the rhetoric.”

“Wonderful. I remember something vaguely similar from when I was alive, but that one was voluntary, in practice as well as in name. So, where does this group operate out of?”

“No idea.” The colonel shrugged. “Pronouncements are anonymized, incidents appear to be random in location, except for being opportunistic. Their manifesto essentially says that we can voluntarily stop breeding or they will help us along the path.”

I rubbed my forehead. People’s capacity for turning dogmatic stupidity into political movements never ceased to amaze me. “We’ve knocked off 99.9% of the human race, and somehow the crazies still manage to survive. It just defies the odds.”

The Colonel laughed, and we said our goodbyes.

Well, so much for delaying tactics. I was going to have to deal with Cranston. With a theatrical sigh, I connected the call.

“Good afternoon, minister. What can I do for you?”

Minister Cranston smiled into the camera. Or showed his teeth, anyway. I had no illusions about his friendliness. “Good day, repl—Riker. I believe I have someone here that you’d like to talk to.” He reached forward and adjusted the camera at his end, bringing a young woman into the frame.

She smiled shyly and said, “Good afternoon, Mr. Johansson. My name is Julia Hendricks.”

I was stunned, totally frozen. I wouldn’t say she was the spitting image of Andrea, but if this woman wasn’t related to my sister it would be a miracle of coincidence. A small part of my mind knew that Minister Cranston had done this deliberately to manipulate me, but I didn’t care.

Finally, after almost a quarter second of silence, I found my voice. “Hi Julia. I’m assuming we’re related?”

She nodded, quick jerky movements. She seemed very nervous, but whether because of me or because of the minister, I couldn’t say. I had little doubt that the minister had given her very specific instructions, accompanied by threats.

After a moment, she found her voice. “Yes, I’m Andrea Johansson’s three-times-great grand-daughter. I just found this out myself.” She gave a small, aborted glance in the minister’s direction. The message was loud and clear.

I smiled back at her, trying for as much warmth as I could. “So how many collateral descendants do I have?”

I think this question put Julia on more familiar ground. “More than twenty currently alive that I know of, Mr. Johansson, uh, Riker…” She looked down, embarrassed.

“It’s okay, Julia,” I held up a hand. “I’m not really your great-great-great-grand-uncle, I’m just his memories. And I don’t go by Bob anymore, so that’s out. Might as well just call me Riker, like everyone else does. Almost everyone.” I gave Minister Cranston a hard glance. “Or William. Or even Will. I don’t expect you to really care about me, although I’m guessing Minister Cranston expects me to care about you and your relatives.” I tilted my head sideways, a minimal shrug. “And he’s right. But that’s not the same as saying I’ll bend the rules.”

Minister Cranston leaned fully into frame. “We’re all adults, Mr. Riker, and we all know I have ulterior motives, just as all the other delegates do. Nevertheless, you have relatives here, and you will be able to talk to them whenever you want without interference. I’ll leave you to it.” And with that, he got up and left the office. Of course, they could still monitor the conversation, but it was a nice touch.

Julia and I looked at each other in shock for a moment, then we both started to speak at the same time.

The log says we talked for three hours, but it felt like no time at all.





Bob – October 2165 – Delta Eridani



I sat back in my chair, coffee in hand, and watched the fusion signatures of Luke and Bender as they accelerated out of the Delta Eridani system. Picking destination systems for them had been difficult and contentious. There were a lot of M and K class stars relatively close to this system. The problem with those is that they tended to be small and dim, with comfort zones very close to the star. A couple of the candidates were what you’d call marginal, and there was some argument about whether we should even bother with them. In the end, it was up to Luke and Bender. Luke was heading for Kappa Ceti, a G5eV star, just a touch smaller than Sol. Bender had selected Gamma Leporis A, an F6V star, a bit bigger and brighter than Sol. Bender was going to have a long trip—his target was more than 16 light years away. But hey, we’re immortal.

“Report went off to Bill all right?”

[Affirmative. The space station is fully operational. AMI controller is now in charge. The report was handed off for transmission]

I tented my fingers and drummed them together. “Excellent.”

Marvin sat across the desk, nursing a coffee of his own. I watched that for a second, frowned, and asked, “Hey which of us is supplying the VR for your coffee, you or me?”

Marvin rolled his eyes. “Geez, way to break the spell. To answer your question, I am. You’re just supporting the visuals at your end. Crying out loud, we all invented this stuff.”

“Sure, but we’ve also all been hacking away at it and sharing mods. I’d have to really sit down and go over the code to understand what it’s doing nowadays.”

“Hmm,” he said, then changed the subject. “Did you notice with Luke and Bender that they really weren’t carbon copies?”

“Yeah, but I, we, had that discussion with Bill way back about Milo and Mario, remember? Each of us is a bit different. Differences in hardware, quantum effects…”

Marvin waved his hand dismissively. “Invoking quantum effects is just hand-waving. Just means we don’t know. I wonder if, as we get older and accumulate memories, we’re getting too complex for a backup to contain everything. The backup is a digital attempt to save an analog phenomenon. It may simply be too granular.”

I stared into space. “Interesting thought. Y’know, I still have the backup I made you from. Maybe I should use that for the next batch of Bobs and bring them up to date the old fashioned way.”

“Whiskey, with a little sugar and bitters round the lip of the glass?”

I put my hand vertically in front of my nose. “Nyuk, nyuk, nyuk. No, funny boy, verbally.”

Marvin grinned at me, then reached forward and poked one of the video feeds. It expanded to full-size.



Things had settled down in the colony. In all, over forty Deltans had died in the gorilloid attack. Several who were injured but not killed were maimed for life. I’d finally gotten to see how the Deltans handled their dead. They did indeed have a ceremony, and they buried their dead. They also mourned them, every bit as heart-wrenchingly as any human. I’d had to turn away from the video for most of that.

The colony had been cleaned up, and the gorilloid carcasses were gone. Archimedes had found the remains of the buster drone. Not that it would do him much good. All that was really left were the steel caps at either end. Most of the rest of it had been shredded and scattered. But Archimedes had discovered that the two twenty-pound items could be used as a hammer or an anvil. They seemed to be able to take any punishment he threw at them. Well, on a scale of zero to ten for cultural contamination, I’d rate that as a one point five, so screw it.

Arnold kept the axe. No one wanted to try to take it away, and anyway, Arnold was willing to do any chopping that anyone needed. He seemed to enjoy the action, he was very good at it, and the requestor didn’t have to do any work. Very much a win-win.

We’d done enough language analysis that we could now follow conversations, and maybe even speak intelligibly. I massaged the phonemes in my speech routine to produce a generic Deltan voice and tried the result on Marvin with a couple of phrases. He approved of the result. I did some design changes to the exploration drone to add a speaker system and sent an order to the autofactory to build a couple. If the Deltans didn’t decide to head back to the flint site on their own, I was prepared to prompt them directly. If that meant being the great sky god, so be it.





Linus – April 2165 – Epsilon Indi



It took fourteen and a half years to get to Epsilon Indi. Funny, I still sort of thought in terms of human time-scales, so there was this feeling that I’d just used up a major part of my life. Of course, intellectually, that wasn’t true. First, I’d only experienced a little over three years of personal time thanks to Einstein and time dilation. Second, we’re immortal. I just don’t think we’ve internalized that fact, yet.

I had gone off on my own rather than wait for Bill to build another cohort. And I sure as hell wasn’t going to team up with either of the loonie brothers. I don’t know what the deal was with Calvin and Goku. In theory they’re me, but I’m pretty sure I’m not that obnoxious. Um, I hope. Anyway, for all their constant fighting, they seemed to be connected somehow. And I guess they knew it, since they took off together.

Meanwhile, I was here, at Epsilon Indi—fourteen light years from Epsilon Eridani where Bill was set up, but only eleven light years from Earth. That made it a reasonable if not a prime target for probes. As a K-type star, it was cooler and smaller than Sol, and livable planets would be correspondingly closer to the star and more likely to be tidally locked.

Still, it’s not like there was a ton of choice in the stellar neighborhood. When I’d been a kid, watching Star Trek and Star Wars and Stargate and all the other science fiction shows, it seemed like every planet was M-class and every star was yellow. And everyone spoke English. Sadly, turns out old Sol is exceptional. Most of the stars in the sky are either smaller or stupid big. Which means pretty poor pickings for habitable planets.

I was cautious coming into the system. It was possible that one of the other nations had chosen this system as a destination. Medeiros was a known factor, but we had no idea what the others would be like. We could probably rule out friendly, but there was a lot of range between harsh words and firing missiles.

I coasted in, with a couple of scouts ahead of me to scope out the situation. While I waited, I continued to work on my VR. I had decided on domed, floating cities in the atmosphere of Saturn. The rings arched across the sky, and giant clouds bloomed up to incredible heights. Below, breaks in the cloud layers gave line-of-sight for hundreds of kilometers into the depths of the atmosphere. And the cloudscape disappeared gradually into a horizon almost infinitely far away.

I stood in my rooftop garden and looked over the city from my vantage point. Hey, my VR. I can be the rich guy with the penthouse.

[Structures detected]

I looked up. Guppy had appeared out of nowhere with that announcement. I don’t think he approved of my VR for some reason, because he always seemed to be breaking consistency.

“What have we got?”

Guppy pulled up a visual. It was at extreme range for our optical telescope, so all I could really tell was that it was artificial.

[One scout is approaching the structure for a closer investigation]

“Good. When he’s close enough to take a SUDDAR scan, send me the results. Meanwhile, let’s move cautiously.”

[Aye]

***

[We have received a voice transmission from the structure]

That was interesting. I think a message from Medeiros would have been more cylindrical and explodey in nature. “Play it back, please.”

Guppy pulled up the audio file.

“Piss off, mate.”

My eyes opened wide and I choked off a guffaw. “Well, Guppy, I think we’ve found the Australian probe. Which officially didn’t exist, if I remember right.”

I tried to get my grin under control. “Okay, let’s open a channel. Or whatever it is we do to talk.”

At Guppy’s nod, I addressed the structure. “Hi, I guess you are the Australian probe. Pretty sure that isn’t a Chinese accent, anyway. This is Linus Johansson of the FAITH ship Heaven-8. To whom am I speaking?”

“I said rack off!”

“Hmm, nope. I don’t seem to be moving. Want to try again?”

There was a short delay, then, “This is Emperor Mung of the Intergalactic Jalapeno Empire. You’re in sovereign space. Last chance, on ya bike and piss off.”

This guy was either not being serious or he was seriously nuts.

Visuals of the structure were coming in with a little more detail now. It appeared to be a haphazard collection of connected structures and geometrical shapes. Kind of a Salvador Dali on drugs version of NASA’s International Space Station. I wondered if he actually had colonists in there.

“Okay, your highness. Consider me an ambassador from the Bobbian Federation.”

This statement was met with dead silence. However, the conversation—if it could be called that—had given my scouts time to get close enough for a SUDDAR sweep. Guppy popped the scan results up in front of me. No life on board. Not even any on board on board, really. The interior was open to vacuum, and a lot of the structures were missing entire walls. There was no logical order to this thing.

He finally broke his silence. “Are you alone? I’m alone.”

Well, he was volunteering information, now. That was good. “I’m here with you, your highness. That’s not alone, right?”

“Who’s your highness? And who are you?”

Uh oh. Whack job. Definitely. Still, that’s better. At least he’s not an emperor any more. Maybe he’s going to become more lucid. “What’s your name?”

“Henry Roberts. I was selected to represent Australia in the race to populate the stars. I’ve been captured by the Jalapeno Empire, and I’m being tortured for our secrets.”

And we’re back to whack job. “Guppy, keep doing scans. I want to identify the working parts of the, uh, palace. See if the probe is in there somewhere.”

I turned my attention back to Henry. “Tell me about yourself, Henry. How were you selected?”

There was silence, then a sob. “I’m a sailor. I was a sailor. I used to do solo trips. The government offered me the opportunity because they figured I’d be perfect for the job. I don’t like being around people, you know.”

There was another sob. “I miss sailing. I miss people.”

[I have identified the major probe subsystems. Replicant core, fusion reactor, autofactory systems. The probe is partly disassembled and totally integrated into the structure]

“Thanks, Guppy. Load the rail gun, wouldja? Something appropriate for the reactor control system, if you can target that.”

Again, I addressed the other replicant. “How long have you been here, Henry?”

“Centuries. They’re fish. They won’t let me go. They keep torturing me. They demand attention. They make me build more rooms.”

I remembered back to discussions with Dr. Landers about replicants going psychotic. I wasn’t an expert on the field, being more of an engineering type, but this had a definite flavor of psycho. There certainly wasn’t any “they” around anywhere that I could see.

“Henry, are you able to sail? Do you have a body? Do you see yourself?”

“What? No. I’m a space probe. The government took that away. I can’t feel myself. I miss sailing…”

Wow. Sensory deprivation, for years and years. He probably didn’t have the technical know-how to build a VR. I remembered back to the beginning of the trip outbound from Sol, before I’d constructed the VR. Er, well, before Bob had constructed the VR, I guess. But there’d been that feeling of disconnectedness. Decades of that? No thanks.

“Henry, I could give you that back. There’s a way for you to sail again. You just need to let me help you to—”

“Piss off!”

Damn.

“You’re one of them. This is just another torture session. You’re trying to play with my mind! PISS OFF OR I WILL BLOW YOU TO HELL! RACK OFF RACK OFF RACK OFF RACK OFF RACK OFF RACK OFF RACK OFF—”

My shot took out the reactor control system. The reactor, as it had been designed to do, executed a graceful shutdown. And Henry, as the replicant hardware had been designed to do, went to sleep.

This wasn’t what I’d signed up for. But I wasn’t going to leave the guy like this.

***

Epsilon Indi had a Jovian planet a bit outside the habitable zone, and not much else. I promised myself I’d have a more thorough look around as soon as possible. But first, I had to take care of Henry.

The system didn’t have an overabundance of ore, but fortunately Henry had located the biggest concentrations. I started the autofactory on a space station right away. I wanted to talk to Bill about this, but a conversation with a fourteen-year latency would take forever. I was playing with the idea of flying back to Epsilon Eridani and taking Henry with me.

I did a close-up investigation of the Australian hardware. It was very similar to my own. No, I mean really similar. There had obviously been some espionage going on, and someone had borrowed someone else’s design. No way this was coincidence.

I carefully extracted the replicant core from the palace. I set the autofactory to building a proper cradle, power supply, and extra memory. Once I was sure that I had Henry out and safe, I began breaking down the palace for material. I felt a little guilty, like I was stealing or something, but Henry really wasn’t using all this. And it saved time.

Henry didn’t have the knowledge to put together VR, but I did. I could piggyback him on my system. And he might still be salvageable.

***

I stood for a moment behind Henry and breathed the brisk, salty air. The Contessa cut through the chop with a bounce and roll that I found alarming, but that Henry had reassured me was normal. He had known his vessel down to the last bolt and screw when he was alive, so it had been simple to reconstruct in VR.

The South Pacific stretched out to the horizon in all directions. A steady wind to the northwest promised an easy, undemanding day of sailing. Or so the books all said. I was still figuring it out.

Henry turned from the wheel to face me. “Hello, Linus. Come for another round of butting into my life?”

I grinned at him in response. Henry was lucid nowadays, but believed himself to be back on Earth. His memories of the years as a replicant still came back to him as nightmares. I’d made his VR as realistic as possible, which included eating, sleeping, and, um, bodily functions.

“I had that dream again, Linus.” Henry shuddered a little. “The nightmare where I couldn’t feel myself. Where all around me, things talked at me and demanded my attention, wanting me to build something. Where the world was just an endless scroll of night…”

I sat down. “But it’s getting weaker, right? Less intense?”

Henry nodded.

“Good. Now, tell me about when the government came to you to offer you the chance to be the space probe replicant…”





Riker – May 2162 – Sol



Homer and I looked at each other in amazement, then back at the message.

Plans for a Subspace Communications Universal Transceiver (SCUT) with zero latency.

Homer shook his head in disbelief and admiration. “Sumbitch. He did it.”

I nodded at him, sharing the emotion. “I think this qualifies as a good reason to interrupt the printer schedule.”

***

We examined the finished product. It was obviously not built with marketing in mind. Not a trace of chrome, no logo… but according to the notes, communications should be instantaneous across interstellar distances. Almost shaking with excitement, I turned it on.

Connections available:

Epsilon Eridani

Omicron2 Eridani

I examined the menus, registered myself with the software, then pinged Bill.

Bill’s video image popped up immediately. “Hey, Riker. Long time.”

No kidding. Seventeen years, from Bill’s point of view. Less for me, thanks to Einstein. I sat back, arms crossed, and looked over at Homer’s video window. He was grinning ear to ear.

Bill waved at Homer. “Dude, I see you’re still in one piece. And I see you no longer use the cartoon avatar. Any causal connection?”

Homer threw his head back and laughed. “Yeah, pretty sure. Number two is actually talking to me these days. I must be slipping.”

I gave him the Spock eyebrow. “Yeah, but I don’t need you now.”

Homer looked shocked and Bill grinned at both of us.

“Well, it’s nice to see some things haven’t changed,” Bill said. “And now that we’ve gotten the reunion warm-and-fuzzies out of the way, I’ve got a bunch of software updates and VR improvements as well as some hardware upgrades I can download to you.”

“Anything that implements an ignore list?” I glared at Homer.

Bill looked from me to Homer, grinning at both of us. “Now, the big question. What’s the situation with Earth?”

I pulled up my logs. “Here, I’ll send this to you. Faster than explaining it. This setup allows all normal VR interfacing, right?”

“Yep. This is just a different transport layer. Same object interface.”

I nodded and pushed the files toward him. Bill did a momentary frame-jack as he absorbed the information, then came back with a wide smile.

“That is so cool!” Then he lost the smile. “Uh, not the part where 99.9% of the human race is dead. The survivors part. And the relatives part. Of course.”

I nodded. “S’okay, Bill. We’ve all had the same foot in the same mouth. So listen, have you got anything back from other Bobs on possible new homes?”

“Ah. I guess I’ve got a file for you…”

***

“Twin planets?” Colonel Butterworth’s eyes were wide.

“Yeah, just like the file says.” I knew I was grinning like an idiot. I couldn’t stop. After the years of worrying, this was such a huge relief.

The colonel looked at me with one eyebrow cocked. “I doubt you’ll give us both planets. I expect we get first choice, and the Spits get the other. That about right?”

I looked at him in surprise. He had to be testing me. He couldn’t possibly be that dense.

“Colonel, we won’t be giving an entire planet to twenty thousand people. We could put all fifteen million on one of them, in theory. If any travelling Bobs find more planets, we’ll expand the choice of destinations, but at the moment everyone is slated for Romulus or Vulcan.”

The colonel gave a small smile. Yep, testing me.

“As you say. Although I might suggest that some re-balancing of populations would be in order if more worlds are found.”

I nodded. “We’ll play it by ear, colonel. There are still too many unknowns to make any hard and fast plans. But at least we have a destination.”

“True. That means no delay once the ships are ready.”

“Mmm, hmm. Well, I’m going to make a general announcement to the community. I guess you’ll want to be there.”

The colonel smiled. “I’m also delighted that we no longer face the specter of living under domes on Epsilon Eridani Two. I’m not sure if I’d see the point of going at all, unless things got far worse here.”

Colonization of Ragnarök had been a topic of conversation off and on since we’d first started the emigration plans. The general consensus was that it was a last-ditch option. I agreed with the colonel. It was nice to be able to set that option aside.

***

The news was met with joy, enthusiasm, and—surprise, surprise—loud complaints. I guess I should have expected it, and if I hadn’t been personally so giddy with the news, I would have seen it coming. No one wanted to share a planet. From the biggest city to the smallest enclave, they all wanted one to themselves.

Colonel Butterworth and I looked at each other, and I could tell that he’d expected this.

I let it go on for a while longer, then I asked for the floor. “Okay, okay. Look, here’s the thing. Right now, we have two planets available. That’s it, sorry. We can’t delay emigration until we get more, because the Earth is becoming uninhabitable. So here’s how it’s going to go. When we’re ready to ship a group, if there’s nothing else available, they’ll go to Vulcan or Romulus. If and when a new planet comes available, groups will get right of first refusal in the order in which they emigrated.”

“And meanwhile, they’ll have settled in,” Valter yelled into his camera.

“Yeah, and given the warm welcoming feeling you’re projecting, I’ve no doubt they’ll want to stay put.” I held a moment of silence for effect. “Look, this isn’t ideal, but this is a survival situation. We’re abandoning a sinking ship, and we’re spending too much time arguing about who is going to end up in what lifeboat with whom. Let’s think about surviving, first, okay?”

“As if it matters to you. You have no skin in this game. Or at all.” That was Ambassador Gerrold, the delegate from New Zealand, a former Aussie. For whatever reason, he had never liked dealing with me. I was mystified by his animosity, as there didn’t seem to be any reason for an attitude, pro or con.

This time, I simply smiled at him. “I can leave any time. Just put it to a vote and vote me gone. I’ll respect the decision, pick up my football, and go home.” I looked around the videos. “No? Then let’s get back to realistic discussions.”

Without so much as a heartbeat of hesitation, the argument re-erupted.





Bill – April 2162 – Epsilon Eridani



The update from Riker and Homer had been interesting on so many levels. The Svalbard seed vault was a pleasant surprise, and could be a real boon for terraforming Ragnarök. There were a couple of varieties of plants and moss that conceivably could be made to grow on the as-yet bare soil. And if they took hold, they could accelerate the oxygenation of the atmosphere by millennia. Riker had promised to put a clone together to ferry some seeds out to me.

But the most exciting item was a variant of a SURGE drive that could be used on large bodies. Like asteroids. Or Kuiper objects. Epsilon Eridani 2 needed about five or six hundred cubic kilometers of ice dropped on it, in order to connect the seas into oceans. I’d been mulling over how to get those Kuiper objects into the inner system. Hohmann orbits would take decades to centuries. That wasn’t necessarily a problem for me, but for humans needing a place to live, a little more alacrity might be in order.

Anyway, the planetary body SURGE drive wasn’t complicated, though it did require a lot of construction material. It occurred to me that I could use it to accelerate a chunk of ice into an orbit heading for Ragnarök, then remove the drive and fly it to another chunk. Rinse, repeat. As long as I had the drive available when flying icebergs started showing up at the tail end, I’d be golden.

I discussed the idea with Garfield. He looked skeptical.

“I understand the mechanics, Bill, but you’d better make sure that nothing goes wrong. You’re leaving yourself no wiggle room for adjustments.”

I shrugged. “Well, if I fail to catch one of the chunks on the back end, it’ll just sail past Ragnarök and probably end up in the sun.”

“If you fail to catch one, you’ll probably be failing to catch a lot of them. Why don’t you do a couple of simulations?”

“I don’t think that’s necessary, Garfield. Why are you going on about this, anyway?”

“Look, Bill, you really have to stop treating me like Igor. I can do the math, too. Maybe you should take the time.”

Igor? I looked at Garfield in shock. Had I been patronizing him? I understood the reference, and the emotional undertone behind it. Something was definitely up.

“What’s going on, Igor, I mean Garfield?” I grinned at him to show I was kidding.

He returned a brief smile, acknowledging the joke. “I know Bob-1 made that rule about the senior Bob being in charge, but I’m getting tired of being a sidekick. We get a lot of stuff done here, and I’d hate to have to leave, but I think our working relationship needs some adjustment.”

I nodded, thoughtful. “I know you’ve been pestering me about some projects that you wanted added to our backlog. Is that what this is about?”

“Partly. Also, more input on the stuff we are working on. Original Bob was a bit of a lone wolf, and you tend to work the same way, expecting me to tag along. That’s not working so well for me.”

I prodded my psyche. No surprise, I was offended. But I definitely didn’t want Garfield to leave. We worked well together, and accomplished a lot more than each of us could individually. Time to suck it up.

“Okay, Gar, point taken. But don’t expect a raise.”

He laughed and waved a hand at the schematic, which had been hanging in the air, forgotten. “Good. Now, have a look at the plan, and do the math. Take the time, and consider the downside if you’re wrong.”

I nodded in thought. One of the important details of the project was that the ice chunks couldn’t be allowed to slam into Ragnarök at interplanetary speeds. They’d have to be inserted into an orbit around the planet and broken up. The ice would come down as increased rainfall for a few weeks.

I did the simulations as Garfield suggested. Turned out that having two of the drives would allow me to get all the ice to Ragnarök within twenty-five years. Now there was a plan I could get behind.

***

Garfield caught the softball—barely—and after due consideration, more or less whiffed it back to me. I cringed a little, watching him. Original Bob had never been much for sports, and even in VR we hadn’t improved on the basic model.

“You know what you throw like?” I said with a smile.

“Yeah, like you. Tell me again why we’re doing this?”

“First, it’s a good test scenario for fine-tuning the VR. Homer commented at one point that some of the physics is still a little off.” I bobbed the ball in my hand a few times. “Second, and more importantly, I think we have to do more than just sit in libraries and parks and command decks if we want to really retain our feeling of being human. I don’t want to be reduced to some Doctor Evil cliché.” I tossed the ball. “This isn’t exercise in the physical sense, but it does remind our brains what it’s like to do things.”

The return toss went way over my head and landed in the lake with a splash.

“Oops,” Garfield said with a grin.

I gave him my best glare and materialized another ball. “I might build a bunch of Bobs and field a team or two…”

“Oh jeez no. Half of them will turn Canadian and want to play hockey instead, eh.”

I laughed and tossed the new ball.





Riker – September 2164 – Sol



The two colony ships were impressive, even in their half-built state. They would feature two drive rings and a massive reactor cooling section, all necessary to move the huge central cargo section. Since the cargo would be ten thousand human beings in stasis, a significant proportion of the mass of the vessel consisted of shielding. Overall, the colony ship would have looked like a military vessel to a science fiction fan of my day, but without the phaser banks or frag cannons, of course.

One of the ships was farther along than the other—the concession to the Spits resulted in some shifting of manufacturing capability. The third ship would be ready only four months after the first two. Now we were trying to even out the construction of One and Two so that they would be ready together.

I snorted with amusement, thinking of the last couple of UN sessions. Now that the yelling was over, this was more like a project from my former life. Technical challenges and engineering issues. With the manufacturing AMIs doing all the work, I didn’t even have to worry about labor issues.

Negotiations still continued, of course, back on Earth. No one was willing to quietly go along with being scheduled “somewhere down the road.” We still had the fifteen-hundred-trip issue to deal with. We didn’t know for sure that it would be a death sentence, but there was general agreement that the climate on Earth was getting worse. If it got bad enough, starvation was a real possibility, despite all our efforts.

Homer and his crew continued to scour the system. They’d also implemented some techniques for bringing metal up from planetside. That was slow and laborious, especially given the scale of our requirements. I’d allocated a half-dozen printers to Homer—Colonel Butterworth, predictably, had screamed like a stuck pig—with instructions to bootstrap themselves up to a viable operation. So far, Homer was doing better than expected. The amount of refined metal on Earth was considerable, even after the war and subsequent bombardment. He’d already returned the printers to regular ship production, after printing up new ones.

Homer had calculated the possibilities, and gone into his “good news, bad news” comedy routine. The good news was that we could eventually build a lot more colony ships from what he estimated we could haul up from Earth. The bad news was that everyone would be long since dead.

You would think that 3D printers would have solved the scarcity problem. In fact, the technology had just moved the bottleneck. We could build more drones to extract and haul the metal out of Earth’s gravity well, or we could build colony ships, or we could build more printers in order to produce more drones and colony ships during which time we would be producing neither. The calculations to determine the optimum path were finicky and had large error bars. Even thinking about them made me grit my teeth.

The drone had reached its destination. I ordered it to establish a sideways vector, then watched the video as the colony ship’s exterior drifted by. Unfinished sections allowed drones and construction roamers access to the interior. A steady stream of laden drones entering the hull was matched by a stream of empty-clawed drones exiting. The status window revealed no current issues. The printers were keeping up with parts demand, Homer’s supply crew was keeping up with raw materials demand, and the construction crew was kept busy twenty-four-seven.

I shook my head and closed the video windows. Inspection done.

***

Homer and Charles were in Earth orbit, taking a break from their outer-system patrols. We took advantage of the rare opportunity to have an all-Bobs meeting. Even without commentary from Arthur, the tone was a little gloomy. The climate of the planet continued to deteriorate, and was possibly accelerating.

“I think it’s a given that we won’t be getting fifteen million people out-system,” Homer said. “Which means we have to come up with some way to keep them alive here.”

“Triaging will help.” Charles poked a finger at his copy of the holographic globe. “Emigrate the most marginal groups first, move everyone else to the most equatorial locations.”

I shook my head. “Most of the equatorial locations aren’t habitable. Not because of climate—some of them are actually more temperate now—but because of a lack of infrastructure. Conventional bombings or falling rocks will make a city uninhabitable. Add in the problem of a lack of power and water, and you can’t just drop a bunch of people off in the jungle and expect them to survive.”

“A lot of the jungle isn’t jungle anymore,” Arthur retorted.

I grimaced in response. “I know, Arthur, but it doesn’t change the basic point. We can’t move that many people to anywhere that doesn’t have infrastructure, no matter how comfortable the climate. And I don’t see the point of building temporary infrastructure, when it’s going to delay ship-building.”

“And Butterworth will have a cow.” Charles smiled ruefully.

“Okay,” Homer interjected. “Spitballing, then. How about using space mirrors to warm up the Earth?”

I looked at him in surprise. “Not a bad idea in principle. A lot of unknowns, though, as it would be all new engineering. I think we’d need a minimum of a thousand kilometers’ radius for a mirror to have any appreciable effect. Plus, it wouldn’t do anything to clear the spreading radioactivity or repair the damaged and destroyed ecosystems, at least not within a human lifetime.”

“And Butterworth…” Charles said smiling.

“Will have a cow!” We all replied in chorus. Colonel Butterworth had become a bit of a cliché with his standard reaction to any change in plan.

Homer shrugged. He’d done the math, too. “Let’s pass it by the colonel, and see if he grabs his chest and falls over.”

“Space stations?” Charles ventured. “Same problem, though, I guess. Or moon colonies. Building all the structure and infrastructure to keep people alive in space would set the colony ships back decades. And you have to build for a population density sufficient to make a dent in the fifteen million or it’s pointless.”

I nodded, glum. I’d had all these thoughts. Not really surprising that the other Bobs had, too. But anything that we tried would detract from the ship-building. Any useful plan would need to either have negligible impact on the overall plan, or would have to produce significant enough results in a short enough time to be worthwhile.

“And the worst part,” Arthur said, “is that even if we stick to the plan as is, we probably can’t save everyone.”

I ran my hand through my hair. “We keep coming back to this. Nothing we can think of actually improves the overall prospects. I guess all we can do is keep on keeping on, and hope we stay ahead of it.” I looked around at the others. No one would meet my eyes.





Bob – January 2166 – Delta Eridani



I grinned. “A black featureless block. Dimensions one by four by nine.” I leered at Marvin.

He covered his face and shook his head vehemently.

“The strains of Also Sprach Zarathustra in the background…” I continued.

Marvin started to moan.

“As the Deltans leap about, one throws a bone into the air…” Marvin’s dropped his hands and his eyes rolled. I waited a few more seconds for effect, then relented. “So we’ll just go with the drone, then?”

Marvin pinched the bridge of his nose. “I can’t believe I’m related to you.”

I laughed and turned to the desk. “On a more realistic note, we have drones with speakers now, so we can talk to the Deltans. Honestly, I think I’ll just go straight to Archimedes rather than trying to contact an elder.”

“Oh, I agree with that. Any of the others would probably just run screeching from the area. Archimedes will be curious.”

I nodded. “So, no background music?”

“Oy.”

***

The surveillance drone showed Archimedes doing his usual patrol of the area. He varied his search from day to day, and had taken to randomly digging holes, looking for more flint. A couple of the other juveniles had accompanied him on occasion, but without any payoff, that had soon petered out.

I positioned one of the drones in a tree along his usual route. The drone camouflaged itself so that it looked like part of the tree trunk. Even if Archimedes spotted it, he wouldn’t think of it as anything but wood.

The Deltan language was far more guttural than anything humans could produce. I had set up a translation routine, so I could converse in English, without worrying about the fine details.

“Archimedes.”

Archimedes jerked, then went into a defensive crouch, looking wildly about.

“Don’t be afraid. I want to help you and your people.”

Archimedes slowly straightened up but continued to search for the source of the voice. “Who are you? Where are you?”

“I’m farther away than you can see, Archimedes. And I’m the one who destroyed the gorilloid that was attacking you. I’m also the one who brought the flint.”

Archimedes’s eyes lit up. Flint was priceless. I now had his complete attention.

“What do you want?”

I thought of all the ways I could answer that and decided to keep it simple. “I want your people to leave this place and go back to one of the old villages.”

Archimedes’ eyes went wide. “So old Moses wasn’t lying? There used to be other villages?”

“Yes, Archimedes. And some of them are better places to live than this one.”

“Some have flint?”

“Yes, and a better water supply, more food, and better defenses.”

His eyes narrowed. “If that’s so, why did we leave there? Wouldn’t that have been the place to stay?”



I turned and grinned at Marvin.

“Kid’s no fool,” he said.



“It would have been, Archimedes, but your people weren’t thinking of that at the time. Then it was too late, and they’d been driven out.”

“So, why tell me? Why not speak to the elders?”

“Would they listen to me?”

Archimedes had been searching for the source of my voice as we talked. Triumph lit up his face when he spotted the odd section of trunk.

“You are a tree?”

“No, that’s just where I am right now. Would they listen?”

He snorted. “Most of them are so stupid. They ask no questions; they have no answers. They just eat and sleep and hunt.”

I spent a few more minutes discussing it with him. He finally agreed to go talk to the village elders, although he made me promise to show a sign of some kind if it became necessary. In response, I cancelled the probe’s camouflage and floated it over to him. “How’s this?”

Archimedes went rigid and his eyes became huge, but he managed to not bolt. “That works.”

***

I watched from a distance as Archimedes talked to his elders, who sat in a semicircle facing him. It didn’t seem to be going well. Despite all his recent accomplishments and rise in status, Archimedes was still just a juvenile. Even some of the other juveniles had started to laugh and make jokes.

Finally, I’d had enough. I activated the probe and flew it over to hover above his head. The laughter and commentary cut off like a switch had been thrown.

Archimedes was no dummy. The sight of the whole village staring at a spot over his head had only one possible explanation. In an impressive display of natural showmanship, Archimedes didn’t look up or directly acknowledge the probe. He simply crossed his arms and looked smug.



In the background, Marvin commented, “Some things just transcend culture.”

“Or species,” I responded.



The disintegrating gorilloid was still very fresh in everyone’s mind, and the probe looked similar enough to the pieces of the buster to convince the Deltans. There was no backtalk after that. Archimedes explained to them what I’d told him. When he was done, Moses leaped to his feet and started yelling at everyone. It was pretty incoherent, but consisted mainly of variations on “I told you so.” Apparently Moses’ stories had been dismissed for years, and this was payback.

Eventually, Moses’ rant ran down, and the elders turned back to Archimedes. One of them—I decided to call him Hoffa—asked Archimedes if the floating thing would protect them from the gorilloids.

Archimedes looked up at the probe, finally acknowledging its existence. “It calls itself the bawbe.”

He looked around the circle. “It can help, but there are few of them and they are destroyed with each gorilloid they kill. They will guide, and they will help, but we must fight our own battles.”

Arnold, who had been standing outside the circle and listening, chimed in. “We fight here, or we fight somewhere else. The bawbe is right—this place is too open to defend. And I like the idea of more axes and spears.” He waved his axe around by way of emphasis, narrowly missing a few bystanders.

The argument went on for hours. Inevitably, some people wanted to stick with the status quo just because it was familiar. They fought the plan tooth and nail, even at one point suggesting that they send a party of Deltans to scout out the other location. Arnold dismissed that idea with a comment that he didn’t want to come home to a camp full of corpses.



I looked over at Marvin. “Jeez, this crap is universal.”

“Yep,” he replied. “Politics is, apparently, politics, through the whole universe.”





Bill – January 2165 – Epsilon Eridani



[Incoming SCUT Communication from Alpha Centauri]

“Cool!” I put down the file I’d been working on. “Calvin or Goku?”

[Bart]

I raised an eyebrow at Guppy. And got exactly the same reaction as always.

I sighed and grabbed the connection. “Bill here.”

“Hey, Bill, this is Bart. I’m from Calvin’s first cohort. Wow, this is really—”

I popped into Bart’s VR. It was a little rude, doing that without an invitation, but I always got a kick out of the surprised look on my face.

I liked Bart’s VR right away. He’d set up a rustic log cabin, with a cast iron wood-burning stove, a fireplace, heavy hand-made furniture, and lots of rugs and blankets. It reminded me of a place my father used to take us for vacations when I was a child.

Bart was sitting in the big old rocking chair in which dad used to spend most of his time relaxing. He had the look. I mentally added another notch to my SCUT cabinet.

“Holy—”

I laughed at his boggled expression. “Welcome to BobNet. Instant communications up to about 25 light-years. So, Bart, what happened to Calvin and Goku?”

Bart took a moment to examine the VR quality before answering. They all did that.

“The guys reconnoitered Alpha Centauri A and B exactly as set out in the mission profile. They found a Brazilian factory in full swing in A, and the wreckage of a USE probe and autofactory in B. I guess we can consider the USE probe accounted for.” Bart did a half-shrug. “They executed a sneak attack on the Brazilian installation—the modifications for the version-3 Heavens are really effective, by the way—and wiped it out.”

“Excellent. Any colonizable planets?”

“No.” Bart shook his head slowly. “The system is great for resources and such, but nothing livable. And not completely excellent, by the way. One of the Brazilian probes got away, although we don’t think it was completed yet. So it may be unarmed, and it may not have the autofactory equipment loaded in.”

“Mmm.” I thought for a second. “Not great news. Medeiros may try to highjack someone else’s installation. Or maybe skulk around for a while and then raid you guys.”

“We’ve set up early warning systems, not to worry. And we scanned the system pretty thoroughly. I think he’ll head elsewhere.”

I shrugged. It wasn’t worth dwelling on. We couldn’t track him at this point, so we’d just have to wait until he showed up somewhere else.

“Anyway,” Bart continued, “Calvin and Goku set up a Bob factory, then left as soon as one of us was ready to take over. I built the SCUT when I received your transmission, and that brings us up to date.”

I accepted the folder that Bart pushed toward me and took a moment to scan it. Nothing earth-shattering. I was impressed, and a little smug, at how well the version-3 improvements had worked. Medeiros would have to significantly up his game if he wanted to compete now.

“I’m glad to see a Bob factory in operation,” I said. “I’ve been a little remiss in that department since I sent out the last group. I can feel less guilty now.”

Bart smiled in return. We spent a few minutes getting caught up, and Bart promised to pop by occasionally for a game of Scrub baseball. With Bart and the two other Bobs currently being completed, we finally had enough to fill the positions all the way to the outfield.





Milo – August 2165 – 82 Eridani



I decelerated smoothly into the 82 Eridani system. According to all the astronomical info, this was a very good candidate for a habitable planet. The star, a G5V class, was smaller and less luminous than Sol, but still well within the characteristics of yellow suns that human beings would prefer.

I didn’t want to get cocky, but I was anticipating having two good finds in a row under my belt. I doubted I’d ever get a chance to stamp a Brazilian silhouette on the side of my hull like Bob-1, but maybe a couple of planets with green check-marks. Yeah, that’s the ticket.

I watched the survey results intently as the data slowly rolled in. Finally, Guppy announced paydirt. Not one but two planets inside the Comfort Zone, although one was at the inside edge and the other almost at the outside edge. Still, it was exciting stuff. And that would be four planets with check-marks, thank you kindly.

Impatient to pass on the good news, I aligned my comms array with Epsilon Eridani and began squirting telemetry back to Bill.

I set a course toward the outer of the two planets, since it was closer. The planet had a large moon farther out and a smaller moon closer in. Strangely, the larger moon showed a blue color. I suspected that it might actually have open water. The planet itself definitely had large bodies of water.

As I decelerated to place myself in a planetary orbit, proximity alarms sounded. It took me a moment to focus on the cause. Four missiles were coming around the curve of the moon, and they were accelerating aggressively.

Crap! I turned tail and accelerated away, but it was obvious that they had far better legs. I did the calculations, examined alternatives, but there was no out. I was hooped unless I took out all four missiles. I took a moment to give my busters extra instructions to seek out a ship matching the Brazilian profile after dealing with the missiles, then launched all eight busters in the usual pairing strategy.

As the busters headed toward the attacking missiles, my proximity alarms blared again. Four more missiles had appeared, coming around the opposite side of the moon. I was out of busters. With no chance of calling them back to me in time, I had to depend on my rail gun. I did a quick computation. I’d likely get two, possibly three, but there just wasn’t enough time to load the rail gun fast enough to take them all out.

Medeiros had outflanked me and done a good job of it.

As I fired at the approaching missiles, I made sure the communications array was still lined up and squirted off a description of my situation and a differential backup. A calm part of my mind calculated that I wouldn’t get it completed in time. Damn.

The last two missiles filled my view…





Riker – January 2166 – Sol



“They’re dying, colonel!”

The colonel wore his chin-out expression, a sure sign that I was in for a fight. In the last year, VEHEMENT had started attacking food production and supply facilities. Most of their attempts were no more than token efforts—statements, really. But the last three incidents had taken out supplies that the groups in question couldn’t spare. Now they were out of or about to be out of food, with half the winter still to go. Barring cannibalism, we were looking at hundreds of deaths before spring.

Unfortunately, the current political climate was short on empathy. A couple of failed groups, to most of the others, just meant slightly less competition for the emigration queue.

The USE encampment, the FAITH enclave, and the Spits were the richest in terms of food reserves, but they had made it clear that they weren’t about to volunteer anything to help out. The Spits, in particular, were trying to stretch their resources out for as long as they could. Their annual surpluses were swiftly being whittled away. They would be a have-not within a few years.

Three hours of negotiating, pleading, and threatening had accomplished zero. They knew I wasn’t about to abandon them, so they were willing to call all my bluffs.

In disgust, I finally cut off the video connection without so much as an over-and-out.

Homer looked at me from his video window. He’d been following the whole thing. “Damn, number two, this is kind of a rock-and-a-hard-place situation.”

I nodded glumly. For the moment, at least, I was out of ideas.

“It’s going to get worse,” Homer added. “The climate isn’t improving. A lot of groups are only surviving because of reserves of some kind. They’re not producing enough food to get by.”

“Thanks, Homer. I needed that encouragement.”

Homer shrugged. To be fair, he probably wasn’t trying to bait me.

“What we need, Riker, is to go into the farming business or something.”

“We’ve been over that, Homer. We actually could establish farms in the former tropics, but they’d be good for maybe twenty years maximum. And we’d have to build the infrastructure. All the existing farming infrastructure is in the formerly temperate zones.”

Homer stared into space, rubbing his chin. “I keep coming back to space stations. Something itching at me…”

I opened my mouth to object, and Homer held up a hand to forestall me. “I know, Riker. Too complex, not enough population density in a space station to make it worthwhile, too much risk. I just think we’re looking at it wrong.”

I gave a half-shrug and started to respond when Homer yelled, “Crap!” and froze.

I pictured Homer getting hit by a missile and had a moment of panic, but he came back right away.

“Arthur’s dead.” Homer looked as angry as Homer ever did. “I just got the telemetry from the drones up Saturn way. He was working some wreckage when there was a nuclear detonation. I’m getting reports from drones farther away from it.” Homer sighed. “Booby trap. No way to tell who set it up. I told him, several times, to watch for those. He got careless.”

“Did he save a backup anywhere?” Even as I said it, I knew the answer. Making a backup and keeping it on board was easy, but pretty useless in a case like this. And we didn’t have the space to save each other’s backups. I had a TODO item to build some storage into the Sol space station for just this purpose. And, like 99% of my TODOs, it was filed under “Someday.”

I took a moment to mourn for Arthur. Downer or not, he was one of us. Homer was looking at me expectantly, and I realized I was having trouble focusing. With an effort, I brought myself back on track.

“Okay Homer, get the drones to recover what they can, and I’ll go talk to the colonel. Looks like we’re going to need to change the schedule again. We can’t do without a fourth Bob. And I think we’d better build that storage matrix.”

“Um, there’s an alternative,” Homer said. “We’ve got the printers for my Earth-scavenging ops. I wouldn’t say they’re exactly idle, but at least Colonel Butterworth isn’t leaning over them and steaming them with his breath.”

I laughed at the unexpected imagery. And Homer was right. I nodded an acknowledgement to him, and forwarded to Bill an In Memorium entry about Arthur, for the archives. As soon as Charles was back in Earth orbit, we would have a wake.





Bob – May 2166 – Delta Eridani



It took almost a month to get ready. The trek to the best village site would be long and arduous. From discussion with Moses, it seemed that it was one of the first villages to be abandoned, and unfortunately it was the one with the best supply of flint.

Moses wasn’t clear on why it hadn’t been better defended. He apparently had been a young cub at the time, and most of his information from that era was second-hand. He’d been one of the last Deltans to be trained to knap flint before they were forced to leave.

In any case, Marvin had surveyed the route that they would have to take. It would not be easy or quick. A mountainous spine ran down the center of this continent, and there were only a couple of passes that were low enough to be useful. During that part of the trek, there would be no local food unless the tribe got very lucky.

I didn’t know if the Deltans had lost the techniques for food preservation or if they’d never developed them. Before they could leave, I had to teach them how to preserve meat. The Deltans understood the benefit right away and took to it with enthusiasm.

The Deltans worked to build up a larder for the journey. Once the decision had been made, everyone got on board, and with the immediate gift of knowledge that I’d brought, they began to trust that I was steering them in a good direction.

Gorilloids were spotted on a number of occasions, hanging around the edge of the Deltan territory. They might have been hoping for targets of opportunity, but they seemed to have had the stuffing knocked out of them in our last encounter. They didn’t challenge any of the Deltan hunting parties. Of course, the sight of an occasional drone floating about might have had a little something to do with that, as well. I was quite happy to put the fear of bawbe into them.

While I waited for the Deltans to finish their preparations, Marvin and I made sure we built some more busters. They were hardly an ideal weapon—about equivalent to fishing with dynamite—but they were better than nothing. Besides, they made up for their lack of precision with an abundance of theatrics.

We also faced a breeding issue. Deltans, it turned out, had an annual breeding cycle, and a large number of mothers-to-be were coming up on their due date. The Deltans were rightly reluctant to move before the latest generation arrived.

Archimedes’ stock continued to soar with the other juveniles. He was, for all intents and purposes, now a member of the tribal council, something that even Arnold couldn’t claim. I also noted in passing that Archimedes was now showing a lot of signs of Deltan puberty. Likely the next few years would see a whole bunch of mini-Archimedeses running around.

That was fine with me. There was a noticeable difference between talking to him and talking to most of the rest of the tribe.

Finally, the day came. The whole tribe lined up, packed their belongings onto several travois (another gift from the bawbe) and set off into what was for them the great unknown.

The gorilloids were in evidence on departure day, hanging around just out of range and watching the parade. I wondered if the gorilloids actually understood that their erstwhile prey was about to leave for good, or if they were just drooling over all that lunch on the hoof. Either way, the first gorilloid that made a move would get a buster in the face. I was lined up, ready, and just waiting for something to obliterate.

***

The first night was a less than stellar experience for everyone. It rained heavily. I had to keep reminding myself that the Deltans were used to this. They didn’t have tents, just sewn-together skins that each family group would drape over itself. I resolved to introduce Archimedes to the concept of tent poles.

“Better take it easy there, oh great one. Next thing you know, they’ll be eating fast food and watching TV.” Marvin leaned back in his chair with his hands behind his head. “Seriously, it’s not necessarily a good thing to throw too many new concepts at them at the same time. Floating metal deities seems to me to be more than enough for now.”

“Funny you should say that.” I frowned in thought. “Have you noticed they don’t appear to have any concept of religion?”

Marvin waved a hand in the air. “There’s some basic animism there, in the form of things like honoring the animals they kill for food, and venerating their dead. I doubt humans had much more at the hunter-gatherer stage.” He sat forward abruptly. “Hey, speaking of which, do you realize that we have the opportunity here to document their entire prehistory? Well, from the time we got here, anyway.”

“Already started, Marv.”

The camp seemed to have settled down for the night, so I deployed a couple of probes into guard positions and set up parameters to interrupt me. Security precautions complete, I swiveled to face Marvin.

“I notice you’ve started a batch of Bobs at the autofactory. Not that I’m complaining, since that is part of our mission profile—I just wonder if you’ve changed your mind about hanging around.”

He smiled at me. “Not immediately, although I do feel an itchy foot once in a while. Like I said to Luke and Bender, I’m curious as to how this is going to turn out. But it is still your show. Maybe there’s another planet of sentients out there for me.”

I nodded thoughtfully. “How about the planetary survey? Any other Deltans anywhere?”

“Nope. This continent is the cradle of humanity for the Deltans. Strictly a local mutation. There are lots of related species, but none that use fire or make tools.”

I pulled up a globe of Eden and checked out the detail that we had amassed. It gave me time to think. I realized that the idea of Marvin taking off was unpleasant. Somehow, I was a little less of a loner than original Bob. I dreaded the idea of being on my own again.

I sat back and looked over at Marvin, who was tinkering with his own copy of the globe. I sighed and cleared my holotank.

***

The Deltan migration was still pretty close to the schedule. There had been no major glitches so far, and the tribes seemed to have settled into routines. I was not so relaxed. We were now well out of the territory of the gorilloids whose butts we had whupped. Any gorilloids in this area would only see a bunch of easy pickings. Accordingly, Marvin and I had doubled the number of drones on guard duty at night.

So it was more than a little irritating that the attack came during the day.

As gorilloid raids went, it was not particularly impressive. A dozen or so of the animals hit a straggling family group and made off with two juveniles before anyone could react. The Deltans reacted immediately, giving chase and trying to cut the gorilloids off from the forest.

In this situation, a buster would be as big a danger to the two juveniles as to the gorilloids, so we settled for buzzing the animals with the drones, trying to confuse and distract them. It seemed to do the trick. Within moments, the Deltans caught up and skewered half the gorilloids. The rest fled into the trees with screeches of alarm.

Unfortunately, one of the juveniles was dead. The gorilloid that had been carrying him had apparently taken the time to ensure he wouldn’t struggle or escape.

The Deltans were distraught, and had a burial ceremony that evening. But interestingly, there was no talk of the migration being a mistake. If this had been humans, I was pretty sure there would have been all kinds of second guessing and recrimination. But the Deltans just took it in stride. I couldn’t decide if they were being philosophical or fatalistic.



“You know, that’s going to happen a lot more as we go on,” Marvin said to me.

“The gorilloids? Yeah, I know. Not a lot we can do during the day though. Infrared is useless. Everyone is moving—at different speeds, most of the time—and the area we have to cover is just too large.”

Marvin sighed. “I know. It’s just that, even with the last round of births, this is still a small gene pool.”

I nodded and thought about the problem. “Hey, didn’t you mention at one point that there were small isolated groups scattered about? Maybe we should try to amalgamate them.”

“Not a bad idea. Good for both groups. Tell you what, I’ll send up a high-altitude survey every night to look for other fires. If we find any, we’ll send in the bawbe to convince them to move.”

I grinned at him. My reputation as a godling wasn’t getting me a whole lot of local respect, even from myselves.

***

The migration had grown. Not only had we found several small groups and convinced them to link up, but apparently the parade was enough of a disturbance to be detectable for miles around. By the end of the first month, we had one or more groups join up almost every day. While there were often negotiation issues as different Deltans attempted to assert priority, those incidents generally ended without more than harsh words being exchanged. I had a feeling that the flint-tipped spears and Arnold with his big-assed axe contributed to that.

Marvin and I tried to keep the drones out of sight, especially when there were noobs around. We didn’t want to take a chance on scaring anyone off. Sooner or later, though, the topic would come up, or we’d have to fly in close for one reason or another. The results were usually pretty comical. Deltans didn’t react any better to UFOs than humans would.

The migration was up to well over five hundred individuals. A very large portion of that consisted of females and juveniles. So Marvin and I heaved twin sighs of relief when the Deltans made it to the foot of the mountain pass.

This part of the migration had its own dangers. The Deltans would be going well above the altitude of their preferred climate, so it would be colder than they were used to. They had no protection from either the weather or predators, and little or no available prey as they pushed forward.

Before they started the climb, I made sure they re-inventoried their preserves. They would face a week or two without any other source of food. This was not the time to get sloppy.

They started the climb first thing in the morning in order to get the maximum distance. I knew that they would slow down significantly through the days that the climb would take. They needed the best start possible.

It took four days to get to the top of the pass. We’d budgeted for six, so that was huge. The wind was godawful there, though, so no one wanted to stop. They stretched that march well into the evening in order to get out of the wind tunnel at the apex.

***

The trip down went faster, for obvious reasons. Three days later, the migration streamed into forest again with some stored food left over. As a celebration, they camped for an extra day just at the edge of the forest. They took a break and feasted on the extra food. From here on in, they’d be able to forage and hunt.

It took two more days for disaster to strike.





Riker – May 2166 – Sol



[Firewall has blocked breach attempt]

I stiffened and turned to Guppy, the UN meeting forgotten. “What? Someone’s trying to hack us?”

[Affirmative. Source appears to be the video feed from the UN meeting]

“Ongoing danger?”

By way of reply, Guppy threw up a stack trace. I examined the listings. It appeared that the hacker was basing his attack on the basic Heaven design. The original Heaven vessels had no firewalling, relying instead on all communications being encrypted. However, it looked like the encryption routines had a back door. Someone had injected some packets, which had run right into Bob-1’s firewall.

I made sure the UN communications system was logging all traffic. I would try the hack on sandbox Bob later. There was little doubt in my mind that the attempt originated from the FAITH enclave, but I needed some kind of documentation before I made accusations. And there was the question of what could be done about it. It’s not like there was a planetary police force to complain to.

The UN meeting seemed to be all about routine matters today, so I decided to get an early start on the day’s administrivia.

The first item was a message from Homer, just one phrase, “Space Station!” Complete with exclamation mark. I couldn’t see what he could add to the idea that would make it viable, but I would talk to him when I had a few moments.

I glanced back at the video feed of the UN meeting, but still nothing noteworthy was happening.

There was a message from Julia, fairly long, talking about family history. She seemed to have adopted me as a relative with no qualms. I was a little choked up about that, and I hoped she didn’t send it just on Cranston’s orders.

[Source is New Zealand]

Guppy had traced the packets back to their originating stream. But New Zealand? That made no sense. It also meant that I wasn’t going to have the proof I needed to really make Cranston’s life difficult. Maybe I could bluff.

Meanwhile, the hack attempt wasn’t going to get anywhere, so I might as well just let the perp keep at it.

I did a test ping at Homer, and he indicated he was free to talk. I took a moment to feel awe at being able to talk to him halfway across the solar system without any delay. We no longer had to worry about light-speed lag.

I popped into Homer’s VR. “Space Station?”

Homer minimized the window he’d been looking at, and turned to face me. “The answer to our problems,” he said with a grin.

“Not unless you have something new.”

“Just a new perspective,” Homer replied. “We’ve been thinking of space stations in terms of housing people. Of course that won’t work. Got to get the air right, the gravity right, extra shielding for radiation, extra armor for micrometeors, construction for living quarters, feed them, entertain them, yadda, yadda, yadda. But the engineering is a lot easier if we don’t try to house people.” Homer looked at me expectantly.

“Okay, Homer, I give up. We’re going to raise cattle? Or…” My eyes went wide.

“And the penny drops,” he said, pointing his index finger at me. “Farming. You just need enough spin to establish an up and down, so the structural strain you have to engineer for is reduced. The interior can just be one big cavern, and sunlight is available twenty-four-seven. Some equipment to make sure the air mix stays correct and the temps stay in range, and we’re golden.”

I thought about it. “Plants take CO2 and produce oxygen. Any kid with a match can reverse that. But we need to produce calories in as dense a manner as possible. Got anything specific in mind?”

He gave me a thumbs-up. “Damn right. Remember that library entry about gene-engineered kudzu? Improved nutritional content, simplified growth environment, human-digestible…”

“And high sunlight requirements, and optimum temps in the 20 degrees Celsius range. Where are we going to find those conditions? Oh, wait…” I grinned.

“Yeah. And since we have access to the Svalbard vaults now, we can pick the cultivar that best matches the environment we end up with.” Homer hesitated and held up his index finger. “But kudzu needs a lot of water, so we’ll have to constantly truck a supply up, unless we bring in some icebergs from Saturn—”

“—Using the asteroid movers.” I was becoming enthusiastic about this idea as we worked through the details. “Which we can also use to bring in regolith for soil. Fertilizer will have to come up, but that’s small potatoes, volume-wise. Especially once the operation gets going.”

“And the best part,” Homer finished, “is that the work can be done with my printers, the same ones that are building Arthur’s replacement right now.”

Homer’s last comment made me think of Colonel Butterworth, and I groaned. The colonel very likely wouldn’t be mollified by that line of reasoning. To him, any equipment that could do something else could also work on his colony ships.

“Butterworth is still going to have kittens.”

Homer bounced up out of his chair. “This will be fun. Can I watch?”

***

Not only did Butterworth have kittens, but the UN assembly went ballistic. Everyone except the groups that were facing starvation was beyond apoplectic and well into incoherence. I sat there, jaw dropping, as people complained about criminal misuse (their words) of a resource that wasn’t even part of the construction equation. Finally, I’d had enough. I signaled for the floor.

“Ladies and gentlemen, here’s the thing. People are about to starve, and I mean within six months to a year. Those of you with reserves have refused to consider sharing, so that leaves it to me to fix things. This is a viable option, and it doesn’t even affect the schedule. Yes, it affects future colony ships as we’re using scavenged materials for space stations instead of colony ships. However, I’m willing to trade future colony ships against current lives. And by the way, some of you here will be depending on our kudzu gardens by the time your turn comes around. So let’s not be too critical, okay?”

I turned off my mike, which was the video equivalent of sitting down, and watched as the speaker was inundated with requests to speak. Unbelievable. This crap is universal.

***

I was going through my daily round of calls, and naturally, one was Cranston. Outstanding. On the other hand, I did have this hacking thing to talk to him about. I rubbed my eyes, got myself a coffee, then activated the connection.

“Good afternoon, minister. Anything in particular you wanted to talk to me about?”

“In fact, there is, Mr. Riker. Today’s session, specifically. While we are not the richest enclave on the planet, we do have some surplus.” He nodded an acknowledgement. “As you’ve taken great pains to point out, on several occasions.”

“And you’ve refused to give any of it up. Has something changed?”

“In a manner of speaking. Since you have this kudzu idea, it seems that giving up some of our surplus would now be a temporary setback rather than a permanent crippling action…”

I sat up straighter. Very likely there was a but in there somewhere, but the minister was at least sounding reasonable.

“…Of course some quid pro quo would be in order as well. Since you’ve already decided to put the Spits in ship three, and the remaining space is just about right for our enclave—and without our surplus we’d be part of the have-nots—it seems to me that we would be a reasonable choice for the balance of the ship’s allocation.”

The minister looked at me expectantly. I bristled at the implied request for favoritism, then had second thoughts. Everything he said was true. And while the FAITH enclave wasn’t a shoe-in to be next in line, they weren’t an unreasonable choice either. Especially with any surplus gone. And rewarding such an overt display of cooperation would send the right message.

I stared into space for a few milliseconds. Interesting. I would actually be displaying a negative bias by dismissing his proposal out of hand.

“Minister, that’s a surprisingly reasonable proposal. I’ll have to discuss it with my team, but it sounds like it’ll fly.”

Minister Cranston managed to not look too smug. With a nod, he reached for the off switch.

“One moment, minister. There’s a small matter that I need to discuss with you.” I filled him in on the hack attempt, leaving out any details of why it failed. “Any thoughts on this?”

He was silent for several seconds—an eternity to me. When he spoke, he sounded uncharacteristically embarrassed. “I’m assuming, Mr. Riker, that the geographical source of the attempt is the only reason that you are asking instead of accusing.” He gave a small smile. “As it turns out, New Zealand makes sense. The fact is that our probe technology may not have been, ehm, entirely original FAITH research. Australia was working on the probe concept, and one of our agents may have, ehm, borrowed some ideas.”

“Espionage? You stole their plans?”

“Call it what you will, it’s very likely that the Australian Federation has, or had, some very good insights into your original design. And New Zealand is where most of the survivors would have ended up once Brazil started dropping rocks on Australia.” He looked at me with his head cocked, the implication clear.

“Very interesting. And thank you for being frank about that, Minister Cranston.”

We said our goodbyes, and I sent a quick IM to Charles and Homer.

Charles’ response came back within moments. “I agree on the FAITH proposal. That also saves our relatives. I know you don’t want to make that part of the equation, but I’m less worried about being impartial.”

And from Homer: “Agreed. And the Australian explanation sounds reasonable. Cranston very rarely sounds reasonable. I hope he didn’t sprain something.”

I chuckled at that. Okay, looked like we had a deal.





Bob – June 2166 – Delta Eridani



In retrospect, I guess we should have expected it. There had to be a reason why the Deltans had abandoned this side of the divide, despite the better locations and resources. And there was, in the form of gorilloids.

The Deltan migration was large, noisy, and spread out. Like a travelling smorgasbord, they proved an irresistible attractant.

The gorilloid raid struck early in the morning, after first light, when the drone IR sensors had become useless. Of course, the gorilloids neither knew nor cared about that. They simply moved when they had enough light to see.

The Deltans were half asleep, half organized, and totally unprepared. The number of attackers totally overwhelmed any defenses and even took Marvin and me by surprise.

They attacked on several fronts at once in classic pack hunting style. They cut off individuals from the main group, while keeping the defenders busy with feints. A dozen Deltans, females and juveniles, had already been grabbed.

Fortunately, we had the busters on standby as a matter of policy. It took less than ten seconds to bring them in. A dozen gorilloids disintegrated in claps of thunder. We had to select targets that weren’t too close to Deltans, so this did nothing to save the abductees. That posed a separate problem.



“Guppy! Put a drone on each Deltan abductee. Stay with them, no matter what.”

[Aye]



The buster attack froze the gorilloids and rallied the Deltans. With the flint-tipped spears, the defenders had the upper hand in close-quarters fighting.



“There are too many. We just don’t have enough busters.” Marvin looked to me with panic on his face.

I turned to Guppy. “The busters at the autofactory…”

[Are on their way. However, transit time will be almost a day at maximum acceleration]

We had started with twenty-five busters. We’d used up half of them in the first rally, and almost fifty gorilloids remained. I found myself frozen for several milliseconds.

Marvin snapped his fingers. “Let’s not use them all destructively. Hit the gorilloids at the speed of a thrown rock. A forty-pound steel ball will still slow them down, then the Deltans can finish the job.”

“Do it.”

We began hitting the gorilloids at low speed. Gorilloids were amazingly tough—a strike from a buster at that speed would kill a human outright, but the gorilloids were only stunned for a moment. In several cases I found myself bludgeoning the same gorilloids multiple times.

We were still losing busters. A unit could handle up to a dozen strikes before something malfunctioned. I made a mental note that we would have to figure out a way to collect the busters for repair. And quickly.

“Guppy, start the autofactory on building more busters, top priority. And send a couple of transport drones to the migration location.”

[Aye]



Eventually, the Deltans’ defense gained the upper hand. The females and juveniles had packed into a dense mass in the middle, and the gorilloids couldn’t get close enough to break off any stragglers. The defenders moved in organized groups, and covered each other’s backs. We were down to six busters and had to be very careful about conserving them.

“Okay, Marvin, it’s time to go after the abductees. Guppy, give us a rundown on locations and status.”

Guppy popped up a relief map of the area with locations of Deltan victims and a tooltip beside each. It didn’t look good. Over half of them were already being eaten.

We each took two busters and went after the gorilloid groups. We’d smack the gorilloids in the back of the head until they either gave up and ran away, or the victim got loose during the distraction. In the end, we saved maybe a third of the abductees.

I flew a drone over to Arnold. “There are people who are injured and can’t make their way back to the tribe. You’ll need to organize retrieval parties.”

Arnold gazed at the drone for a few moments, then started pointing to individual Deltans and giving orders. I had to hand it to the Deltans, they were a decisive race. When action was required, there was no backtalk. In moments, they had organized rescue parties, who jogged off, following the drones.

I expected all but one of the surviving abductees to pull through, although some of them would have permanent disabilities.

I sighed and looked at Guppy. “How many TO-DOs do I have concerning teaching the Deltans some basic medical procedures?”

[twenty-six]

“That’s what I thought.” I was scared to ask how many total TO-DOs I had stacked up. Not for the first time, I considered building a couple dozen Bobs and attacking the list until it was under control. And as usual, I couldn’t think of any items on the autofactory list that I could bump to make room.

I’m sick of this. “Guppy, I want the buster count up to fifty, then I want you to pull one printer group and set it to building more printers. It’s time to bootstrap.”

[Printer group duplication is time and resource intensive and will impact operations over and above the immediate loss of manufacturing output]

“I know. Short term pain, long term gain. If we’d done this in the first place, we’d be breaking even now. It’s time to get ahead of things.”

I turned to Marvin. “I’m seriously considering constructing explosive armaments.”

His eyes went wide. “Wow. That’s a helluva concession. We hate explosives.”

“I know. Plus there’s a risk of blowing up the printer with each unit built. I’m thinking of building them the old-fashioned way. I’ll build a chemistry lab, assign some roamers to it, and use industrial methods to build warheads.”

“You’re talking about significant lead time.” Marvin shook his head, doubt written all over his face.

“Yeah, but I have a bad feeling that we’re going to be facing gorilloids for a long time. Run the numbers and calculate what the average population density has to be in order for them to be able to gather that many gorilloids together in so short a time. I think this side of the pass is gorilloid central.”

Marvin stared into space for a millisecond or so, then nodded. “I see what you mean. This is going to be a war of extermination.”

***

“After coming all this way, you want us to stop here?” The elder’s ears were sticking straight down in the Deltan equivalent of an incredulous stare. I looked around the tribal circle and saw the same expression on most of the faces.

I sighed. The drone was not a great way to have a conversation. It might be impressive to a primitive people, but the lack of body language was really hampering me.

I tried again. “It’s only temporary. I destroyed most of my busters”—the translation program rendered that as flying rocks—“in that attack. I need to build more. At least here, we’ve thinned out the gorilloids, and put a scare into the surviving ones.”

Arnold, who was now a member of the circle, nodded in agreement.

“It is true. The beasts will not attack again soon. They lost three for every person they took, and we got most of those back.”

Sadly, although the gorilloids hadn’t done well in terms of stealing a meal, they had managed to kill almost twenty Deltans during the attack. That was an unsupportable level of attrition. A few more attacks, and we’d be back down below the numbers at the start of the migration.

“How long?” The elder wasn’t conceding, he was asking for clarification. I wasn’t anywhere near done here, yet.

“Five days. I have more busters on their way, and I want another set on hand before taking on more risk. After that, I’ll be bringing in more as fast as I can make them.”

Arnold stepped in again. “This is not going to be over in a hand or two of days. For this many gorilloids to have shown up so fast, there must be many of them.”



I spared a moment to be impressed by this observation. I looked at Marvin, whose eyebrows were climbing his forehead. “I guess that’s a reminder,” I said to him, “that big doesn’t mean stupid. This guy is sharp!”



I returned my attention to the drone. “Correct. I’m running my flying rocks through the forests, counting up the gorilloids. Then we’ll have a better idea of what we’re up against. And maybe we can avoid the biggest concentrations.”

“Can you not just kill them before we get to them?”

It was a reasonable question. “I would be using up my busters killing gorilloids that might never bother us. Better to concentrate our energies on those who show up. I will, however, give more warning in the future.”

The elders nodded. They understood scarcity of resources.

Orders were given, and people started to set up a more long-term camp. Arnold organized hunting parties. And I went looking for Archimedes to talk about tent poles.

***

“It seems like a lot of work for not much benefit.” Archimedes examined his first attempt at a tent. Really, it was barely a lean-to.

“Your blanket isn’t big enough to supply much coverage. With a larger blanket, you could make it tall enough to walk in and out, and you’d have sides to keep the rain and wind out.”

Archimedes walked around it. “Hard to pack and carry. Hard to set up. It seems like something that would be more useful in a permanent camp.”



Marvin laughed at the look on my face. “Take that, oh great sky god!”

“Shaddap.”



I set aside the tent project and changed the subject to straightening spears. This was something that both Archimedes and Arnold were both enthusiastic about. They’d seen the difference that simply picking straighter spear shafts could make. The idea of taking almost any shaft and straightening it was a revelation to them.

We talked for a while about how to steam the crooked piece of wood and how to build bending jigs. Arnold and Archimedes left to look for construction materials, the axe hanging casually across Arnold’s shoulder.

I rotated the drone to look over the camp. So many things to do. I might have forever, but these people, not so much.





Bill – January 2174 – Epsilon Eridani



[Message received from Milo]

I looked up, momentarily irritated by the interruption. I’d been going over growth projections for the mosses, lichens, and grasses that I was cultivating. I’d built one of Homer’s farm donuts to grow as much base stock as I could manage before introducing it to the surface of Ragnarök.

“He went to… 82 Eridani, right?”

[Correct]

“So…”

[Message contains a description of a very positive potential colonization destination. Message also contains a record of the destruction of the Heaven vessel]

“What?!”

I filed my work, cleared my desk, and pulled up the message from the in-queue. I could hear Milo’s enthusiasm as he described the early survey of the system. And his fear as he relayed the information about the approaching missiles. There was a differential backup attached, but I had a bad feeling…

“Guppy, any chance on that backup?”

[Negative. The transmitted backup was cut off before completion]

“Damn.” There was a lot of information on this in the libraries. If I attempted to kludge something anyway—to forcibly restore him, basically—there was a very good chance that the result would be insane or simply non-viable. As sad as I was to lose one of us, I had no desire to see myself in that condition.

“Okay, Guppy. Archive the backup, mark it In Memorium. We’ve got four version-3 Bobs being built right now, correct?” At Guppy’s nod, I continued. “Start another four as soon as physically possible. Give all of them extra busters. We’re going to extract payment for Milo.”

[Aye]

This Medeiros character was really turning into a thorn. First Epsilon Eridani, then Alpha Centauri, now this. Time to take out the trash.





Riker – January 2168 – Sol



I popped into Homer’s VR. “Hey, number three.”

Homer grinned back at me. “You know that’ll never be as funny as number two, right?”

“Meh.” I shrugged. “Now that you’ve gone all establishment, you need a nickname.” I popped up the list he’d sent me earlier. “You’re really going for this ranch donut, aren’t you?”

“Why not? We way over-engineered Farm-1, to the point of embarrassment, honestly. We’ve learned enough that I think we can give a half-gee at the rim without coming anywhere close to failure. And now that we’ve figured out atmosphere controls…” He raised his eyebrows knowingly at me.

In fact, the first couple of months of Farm-1 had been a nightmare. Every aspect of the environment kept going into positive feedback loops. We’d ended up putting four full-time AMIs on the job until we were able to figure out how to dampen the resonances.

“Okay, General Bullmoose. Just remember the little people, okay?”

Homer laughed, and I called up a coffee. Things were looking up.

The donuts, as we’d taken to calling them, looked like fat bicycle wheels. Carbon-fiber cables ran from the hub to the rim, providing most of the structural support. Three thicker spokes provided elevator access from rim to hub. The donut was oriented perpendicular to the sun, and mirrors between the rim and hub reflected sunlight into the interior through the transparent roof of the rim. Everything was designed as simply as possible, to minimize construction time and material requirements.

I sipped my coffee in silence for a few moments. “What I’m really liking is that VEHEMENT can’t get at these things. Sabotage-proof.”

“Unless they develop ground-to-space capability,” Homer replied in an off-hand tone.

I glanced at him, but I don’t think he was suggesting it as a serious possibility. There had been more attacks on food supplies Earthside, and we’d been shifting supply schedules to compensate. The new farm would hopefully take the pressure off.

Farm-1 was delivering raw kudzu on a regular basis, allocated by population and by need. I had been assured by Julia that no amount of inventive spicing could make kudzu anything other than, well, kudzu. Plus it had digestive consequences similar to beans. Hmm. Good time to be a replicant. Homer had come up with endless variations on the Beans, Beans song, some of which had caught on Earthside.

The second space farm would be going into production in a week, and my calculations indicated that it would bring us into a comfortable food surplus situation for the next three years. After that, falling Earthside production would again become a significant issue.

The third station, which was still about half finished, would be a mix of crops, both for dietary variety and nutritional health. Homer was talking about establishing ranching on the fourth one—cattle, pigs, and chickens. Sheep, if the New Zealanders didn’t eat all the stock first. There was genetic material in the Svalbard vault, but we would have to build the artificial wombs if we wanted to use that.

Homer had turned into an industrial tycoon. He was understandably proud that his idea had worked, and so well, and it had become an all-consuming pet project for him.

I finished my coffee and stood up. “Back to the salt mines, I guess. Try not to blow anything up, okay?”

Homer saluted me with one finger as I popped out.





Bob – June 2166 – Delta Eridani



The Deltans were attacked again before we pulled up camp, but not by gorilloids. I had become so obsessed with the gorilloid/Deltan struggle that I’d forgotten that this planet had a full-on ecosystem, as diverse and rich as anything Earth had ever produced.

And that included more than one apex predator.

In this case, the attackers were something that filled the same niche as a leopard or other jungle cat. Except that this species hunted in small packs. They took down a hunter who had stepped a few paces too far from the group. The rest of the Deltans jumped to his aid and laid into the predators with spears. It was over in moments.

Fortunately for the intended victim, I guess, the leopard-analogues (I was not going to call them leopardoids) didn’t kill their prey instantly. Like many big cats, their strategy was to get a death grip and suffocate the victim. The bad news was that the hunter was left with some pretty significant wounds. As they helped him back to the camp, one of the other hunters joked that he’d be entitled to one of the carcasses for being such good bait.



“I really like these people,” I said into the air.

Marvin turned to glance at me. “Damned good thing too. Otherwise you’d have to work up a fire and brimstone routine.”

“Hmm, yeah. Brings up a point. I’m going to hang around and help them for a generation or so, but I’d better let myself fade into legend after that. I really can’t afford to let them become dependent on me.”

“Right. And that’s probably when I’ll take off.” Marvin pulled up a star chart of the space around Delta Eridani. “Places to go, species to meet…”

In the silence that followed, I reflected again on how little I looked forward to Marvin leaving. We’d diverged since he was created, into two distinct people. But we got along, which wasn’t a sure thing. I smiled to myself as I remembered one of Bill’s transmissions detailing some of the fireworks of Riker and Homer’s early days. Wish I’d been there for that. It sounded like a great show.



With the arrival of the latest batch of busters, we were sufficiently up to strength to be able to risk resuming the march. I announced this to the circle of elders but was careful to phrase it as information rather than as an order. I didn’t want to fall into the trap of putting myself in charge of their fates, and I certainly didn’t want the political fallout among the Bobs from creating that kind of situation.

The elders discussed things, then announced we’d be leaving the next morning.

***

Departure went without a hitch. The Deltans had benefited from a week or so of rest. Most of the wounded were now mobile enough to keep up, and they had built up their supplies during the stop. I had doubled the overnight guard and had every single available buster in the air, ready for so much as a butterfly to twitch. Maybe the gorilloids felt the bad karma, because they were nowhere to be seen.

The going was slower than the first half of the migration. The land was a little rougher, and the forest verged on being jungle. We were on the south side of the mountain range, and the climate reflected the slightly more tropical latitude. On the minus side, between that and the enforced stopover, we would arrive well behind estimates. On the plus side, it really didn’t look like the approaching winter would be much of a concern on this side of the mountain pass. I decided to be philosophical about it.

As the Deltans walked, I floated along beside Archimedes. He had recently become quite attached to one of the females from his cohort, whom I had named Diana. She was obviously afraid of me but didn’t want to look bad in front of Archimedes. She stuck as close to him as she could, while trying to stay as far from my drone as possible. It was a little comical, but I didn’t give in to my more immature urges.

At the moment we were discussing medical knowledge and procedures. The Deltans were in the potion-and-poultice stage, and while I had no doubt that some of their concoctions had some medicinal value, I was pretty sure that some root wasn’t going to fix a broken leg.

“Yes, I understand, Bawbe. You’ve brought enough new ideas that have worked. I’m willing to take your word for it.” Archimedes shrugged. “But the medicine woman has been doing things her way all her life. I’m not going to go head-to-head with her.”

“Okay, point taken. How about you introduce me to her, then?”

Archimedes nodded, then turned to Diana, who was somehow managing to look even more alarmed. “You don’t have to come,” he said.

“I want to,” she answered. “Maybe she’ll kill him.”

Wow. Maybe I’d line up a buster or two for the meeting.

***

We endured three more attacks before we arrived at the flint site. None of them were as big as the first attack, and we only lost a couple of people overall. On the other hand, gorilloid losses were extensive, a fact that made me very happy.

“We’re going to hunt them out?” Marvin looked shocked.

“Hell yes. Take out gorilloids for miles around.” I waved at the relief map. “Thin them down to the point that the Deltans can handle them.”

“Mm, and what about when they repopulate? It’ll just be the same thing all over again. You’d be better off to kill the ones that attack and leave the others alone. Eventually, you’ll breed a type of gorilloid that doesn’t like attacking Deltans.”

I thought about that for a moment. “You have a point. Well, we’ll see how bad it is when we get to the site. It may need some up-front thinning just so the Deltans have time to sit down and eat in peace.”

“I hear that.”





Riker – October 2170 – Sol



Final assembly. Two magical words that sent a thrill through me. Homer, Charles, Ralph, and I drifted a half-kilometer from the two ships. We’d all agreed that it was pointless to be physically present when a video feed from a drone was every bit as good. But we’d done the agreeing while rushing to be here in time for the event. So much for logic. Even Colonel Butterworth had talked about taking one of the shuttles up to watch, but he’d eventually regained his senses.

As the ships had approached completion, we’d deliberately adjusted construction resources to bring their status into sync. Both ships were now complete except for the final connection of the drive rings to the hull.

“Damn, dude. We’ve actually done it.” Homer’s voice was filled with the sense of awe that we all shared. For someone who grew up in the twentieth and twenty-first century, this was by far the largest single engineering project ever undertaken. I couldn’t help thinking of the Utopia Planitia scenes in the Star Trek movies when a starship was being constructed. This had much of the same flavor.

I looked over at the summary window. Every UN delegate was online, streaming the video. The UN had had a rare rush of common sense to the head and decided not to make speeches. I suspected that the fact that every single one of them would want to make a speech had figured into that. It would have worked out to about eight hours of speeches. Kill me.

And finally, the construction AMI reported that all connections were successful. The two colony ships, officially Exodus-1 and Exodus-2, were complete. I was surprised to find myself tearing up. Okay, maybe not all that surprised.

***

“So now what, Will?” Julia was surrounded by several members of her family in the video window. Conversations with the famous ancestor had become a regular thing at the Hendricks household. There were always people entering and exiting the video window. I didn’t mind at all. The sight of my sister’s descendants made me feel real, much more than the VR could. Knowing that a piece of me had lived on was satisfying on a level that I couldn’t come up with words to describe. It might not be quite like being a parent or grandparent, but it would certainly do as a next-best.

I popped up an inset list. “System tests, integration tests, stress tests, and finally a shakedown cruise. Stuff happens, of course, but it should be pretty routine.”

“And the third ship?”

Naturally, Julia was interested in that one. She and her family would all be on Exodus-3, along with the Spits group. I had wrung that promise from Cranston before agreeing to his proposal. There was no reason for him to renege. The three hundred or so people who couldn’t fit on the third ship would be the first onto the fourth, and were guaranteed established homes when they arrived in Omicron2 Eridani. Cranston had asked for volunteers, and surprisingly, he’d gotten them. I guess some people are happy to skip the hard work part.

Julia sighed and smiled at me. “Before you arrived, there was a general feeling that we might be the last generation of humanity. Some people were saying it was selfish to have more children. I’m glad it didn’t turn out that way.” She hugged her son, Justin, one of the newest members of Clan Bob, sitting on her lap.

Justin had no idea what was going on. But the pictures were pretty, and he loved his uncle William. I made a face at him and he laughed. Justin Hendriks, Space Cadet.





Bob – July 2166 – Delta Eridani



The day finally arrived when we reached the area of the flint site. The former camp was at the top of a rise that stuck up out of the general forest level. On Earth, a castle would have been built there. From my earlier survey, I knew that it commanded a view of the forest for miles in every direction, right out to mountains and hills on the horizon. The site was rocky and bare but had a depression at the base of a rock shelf that formed a natural sheltered area. Several rock pools formed natural reservoirs, filled by the frequent rains. A central mesa rose from the shelf like the conning tower of a submarine.

It was in fact, such a naturally ideal site that conversations kept coming around to why it had been abandoned.

“Don’t know,” was all we got from most of the elders. Moses commented that he only remembered his parents being very scared. He thought—and it seemed likely—that the place had been overrun by gorilloids. One of the other elders, I noticed, didn’t seem comfortable with that explanation. I resolved to talk to him later.

I directed the drones to do a quick survey to a mile in radius, looking for gorilloids. The results were chilling. This appeared to be a gorilloid preserve or something. The damned things were everywhere. But why? With no Deltans to eat, this felt like a badly laid out D&D scenario.

The answer wasn’t long in coming. I hadn’t really done much in the way of biological analysis or investigation since I’d discovered the Deltans, and I guess this was my comeuppance for that oversight. The gorilloids were omnivores. The vegetation on this side included a tree with nutritious seedpods, the gorilloid’s primary staple. The pods were tough to get to and tough to open, which explained the size and strength of the animals.

And if the biochemistry of Eden followed that of Earth, the pods would be incomplete protein sources. So what has lots of protein? Deltans, of course.

That looked like the explanation. The seedpods were more than plentiful enough to supply a large population of gorilloids, but the beasts would be crazy attracted to protein sources. And I’d just marched a couple of hundred bundles of protein right into the middle of them. Great.

But there was still something about the gorilloid population that didn’t add up…

Without warning, a couple of loud booms reverberated through the forest.

[Two gorilloids approached within proscribed distance and were neutralized]

“Thanks, Guppy. Good job.”

I didn’t want any surprises, so I’d instructed Guppy to busterize any gorilloid that strayed within a hundred meters of the Deltans. The Deltans were quite used to the sonic booms now and only looked up to check for more gorilloids. But drone sensors showed gorilloids leaving the area in a hurry.

“Arnold, we need to get into a defensible position.”

Arnold nodded to the drone, then turned and started yelling orders. Deltans moved with alacrity toward the bluff. Outriders on guard brandished the biggest and best spears.

***

The Deltans settled in without difficulty. There were old firepits, cleared-off sleeping areas, and even piled up rocks usable for building small walls. Arnold set up sentries immediately and asked me about the distribution of local gorilloids. He didn’t look like he liked my answer. Couldn’t really blame him.

The moment their luggage hit the ground, Archimedes and Moses headed off for an area that Moses pointed to. The ACME Axe and Spearhead Manufacturing Company Unincorporated was about to be launched. I assigned a drone and a couple of busters to shadow them.



“Well, are we going to do a culling?” Marvin’s expression indicated pretty clearly what he thought of the idea.

“Naw. You’re right. We need a long-term solution, which involves gorilloids learning to avoid this area, and teaching their young to avoid it as well. I’ll keep the buster AMIs on sentry duty, and we’ll just take out any gorilloid that comes too close. They’ll eventually make the connection.”

“And the tribe will learn to expect the protection of the bawbe.” Marvin laughed, but I sensed an edge to his humor. I directed a raised eyebrow his way.

“Have a look, boss-man,” he said and pulled up video output from one of the drones.

In a corner of the flint site, some Deltans had carefully arranged pieces of a buster and had placed small torches around them.

My eyes widened. “That’s…”

“An altar. Yep. All hail the bawbe!”





Bill - March 2167 - Epsilon Eridani



The orbital schematic display laid it all out, and I didn’t like the message.

I looked over at Guppy. No help there. Admiral Ackbar stared back at me, blank fishy expression revealing nothing.

“Can we still save the iceberg?”

[Probability greater than 50%. However, we may not be able to save the asteroid-moving equipment]

I rubbed my forehead, and tried not to swear. “Okay, Guppy. You take care of the course corrections. I’ll set up a script for the drones for retrieval of the drive. Maybe we can cut some corners.”

The iceberg coming up on Ragnarök was one of the biggest we’d found so far in the Kuiper Belt. This particular piece of ice had come in a little off course, and we were going to have to run the asteroid drive at maximum until the very last moment to get it into the proper trajectory. I didn’t want to fumble it and have the berg sail off into the sun. Or worse, impact the planet at speed.

Guppy began applying course corrections, with the changes registering on the schematic in real time. I watched the display absently, while I weighed my options. If necessary, I was prepared to let the drive go down with the iceberg and just build a new one. For a smaller chunk of ice, I’d have just shrugged and let it sail on past the planet, but this baby was huge. I could lose every other incoming chunk for the next six months while I built a new drive, and still come out ahead.

But if I lost the drive, I’d have no control over the pieces following this one. If one came in dead center, I would have to watch it go splat.

We were shepherding chunks of ice from the Kuiper belt, spaced about a week apart. Garfield found them and sent them inwards using his asteroid-moving drive, and I caught them at this end with mine. In another ten years, we would have dropped enough ice on Ragnarök to connect its small seas into actual oceans. My long-term plan was to make the planet fit for humanity to colonize.

[Coming up on alignment. Two minutes to shutdown]

“Thanks, Guppy. How much time will I have to get the drive off the berg?”

[650 seconds]

Wow, that was tight. I reviewed the script that I’d written for the drones. Twelve minutes required for a clean retrieval. That was with some wiggle room, but still…

There were twelve separate structures that had to be released from their anchors and flown off the interplanetary iceberg before it hit atmosphere. I’d already written off the anchors – they would take far too long to extract. Hopefully they wouldn’t do too much damage when they hit the ground.

Garfield popped into my VR. “How’s it looking, Bill?”

He was watching the whole drama unfold, and thankfully hadn’t tried kibitzing. There wasn’t anything he could do, anyway, from his location in the outer system. Twice the number of drones wouldn’t have been enough to save all the equipment.

I grinned at him. “Just another day at the office. Nothing to see here. Move along…”

[Shutdown. Begin retrieval]

I ordered the drones to start the retrieval process. From here on, it was up to the AMI artificial intelligences controlling the drones. All I could do was stay out of their way and not joggle their elbows. Either they’d save the equipment, or Ragnarök would have some new craters.

Six hundred and fifty seconds later, the ice asteroid hit atmosphere. We were out of time. If the berg was left to itself, it would skip through the upper atmosphere and sail on into the sunset. Quite literally. Instead, I activated a number of explosive devices, and the iceberg fractured into a huge number of chunks, small enough to be melted before they made it through the layer of atmosphere. As the air dragged at them, they separated into diverging trajectories. They would all melt at high altitude, and fall to the ground as rain over the next several days to weeks.

Except for a bunch of anchors, and two drive segments, which would suffer a slightly different fate. Nuts.

I looked at Garfield and shrugged.

“Well, I did warn you that could happen. Far be it for me to say I told you so…”

“No, of course not.” I grimaced at the video. “The next chunk of ice is due in a week. It’s going to go splat, I’m afraid. Nothing we can do about that one, but if you can fly a couple of segments here ASAP, I can catch the ones after that.”

“And then build some spares?”

“Short term, yes. Longer term, Garfield, the whole anchoring thing bugs me. Slows down the installation, slows down the removal. Something was bound to go wrong, eventually. I’ve been thinking of ways to do this without actual ground contact.”

Garfield looked surprised. “Seriously? Like, just position the segments in orbit around the ice chunk?”

“Mmm, hmm. It would require two separate drive channels, but there’s nothing wrong in principle with the idea. It would speed things up a lot. And I need a break from the Android project. Working the bugs out of that thing has become a game of Whack-a-Mole.”

Garfield laughed. “Okay, old man. I’ll pull a couple of segments and head them your way.”

***

Despite my comment to Garfield, as soon as I had parked the surviving drive segments, I opened up my Android Project file. A video window opened up, showing my current prototype, located over on one of the orbiting labs.

The android was currently powered down and draped on the support rack. Bullwinkle was a quadruped design, about the size of a moose, and every bit as pretty. The external comms array on its head was strangely reminiscent of a famous pair of antlers. Probably not coincidence. Did I mention I’m not very mature?

This was Bullwinkle version five kajillion or something. The basic concepts weren’t that difficult. Artificial skeleton, made from carbon fiber matrix, muscles made from memory plastics that would contract when a current was applied, and sensors to replicate the normal five senses. Package the whole thing up with a remote control system, and a replicant—like yours truly—should be able to control it as if it was my own body.

Well, that was the theory. Getting it working was an ongoing exercise in frustration.

Bullwinkle was working fine, mechanically. The problem was with senses, reflexes, and communications. Wiring for touch, heat, and cold sensitivity required micro precision akin to neurosurgery. Printers could only help so much. And the more of the contextual processing I built into Bullwinkle, the bigger the required local computer system. The more of it I designed to be handled remotely, the greater the required bandwidth. And the more that light-speed latency screwed things up. FTL communications would alleviate that, but I was still nowhere near making a SCUT small enough to fit into the moose.

I ultimately wanted controlling the android to be an immersive experience. I wanted to feel myself running across the ground. I wanted to feel heat and cold and touch, and the wind on my face. This was a far cry from controlling a drone or buster, which was more like playing a video game. I was ninety percent there, but the last ten percent was turning out to be a real PITA.

With a sigh, I closed the folder, and re-opened the asteroid-mover project. Back to work.





Mario – August 2169 – Beta Hydri



Beta Hydri was 23.4 light years from Sol. Rather than argue and compete with the other new Bobs for the closer candidate stars, I had decided to head for the far reaches. “I love to sail forbidden seas,” and all that Melvillish stuff. By the time everyone else worked their way out to this point, I hoped to have a working space station declaring, “Mario was here.”

And let’s face it, I really didn’t want to be around the other Bobs. It still amazed me how oblivious they were to the differences between each clone. It was creepy—Not enough variation to make them separate people, but enough to give them different opinions. It was like seeing myself with brain damage. And yeah, Bob-1 had set the rule about senior Bob being in charge, but I didn’t see that holding for long. Original Bob had never been much of a follower.

Well, whatever. I was here, they were there, and I liked it that way. Time to explore my domain.

I dropped into the system, decelerating at a leisurely 2 g. I could have come in a lot hotter, but on the off-chance that there was a Medeiros here, I didn’t want him to know what I had under my hood. He’d see the 2 g, a fraction of the output of my heavily shielded reactor, and he’d get cocky. I hoped. I really wanted a chance to meet up and hand him another ass-whupping. I had a couple of busters with his name on them. No, really. There wasn’t a lot to do between systems, so I’d had the roamers stencil his name on a couple of busters.

So far, though, there didn’t seem to be anything Brazilian in the neighborhood. Actually, there didn’t seem to be much of anything. It was a large, well-filled-out system, but so far, I’d found no metal ore. Seriously, nothing. This star’s spectral lines showed about two-thirds Sol’s metallicity. Generally, the composition of the system would follow the composition of the parent star.

Hands behind my back, I walked around the balcony of my tree house, enjoying the view and the thousand-meter drop to the forest floor. This forest had never existed except in literature, and even there, it was an amalgam of a lot of different books. Mostly it was from Foster’s Midworld, but I’d thinned things out so there were good lines-of-sight. I’d added lots of earth-birds and deleted any large, hungry, dragony things.

I raised an eyebrow at Guppy. “Got an opinion?”

[Above my pay grade]

I chuckled. The version-2 Heavens had more core and memory space than Bob-1 had started out with. Guppy had a lot of room to expand in the standard design, and I’d given him even more. He was becoming a person in his own right. He was acerbic and flip, just this side of insolent. I loved it. And, of course, he wasn’t a Bob clone.

“Okay, wise guy. Got an analysis?”

[Those I have. Analysis: there’s no metal]

“Thank you, Captain Obvious. Any idea why?”

[No, but I note that all of the other elements are within expected ratios. Only metals are missing. And completely so]

And that was just not possible, not by any known theory of stellar or planetary formation. Guppy blinked once and turned to face me. I knew what was coming.

[Someone else was here first]

“Dammit. Medeiros. But shouldn’t there still be an autofactory around?”

I cut off what I was about to say and thought for a few seconds. Something was fishy with that theory, beside the originator.

“Hold on. How much ore are we talking about? Based on how much we think this system should have, how long would it take Medeiros to turn it all into cute little Medeiri?”

Guppy thought for a moment. Or calculated. Whatever.

[1,732 years. Give or take]

“So we can rule that out. We’ve only come twenty-odd light years. And he would have had to travel for the same amount of time.” I was belaboring the obvious, and I knew it, but I’d always found that talking something out helped to work through it in my mind.

[That does represent a flaw in the theory]

“Ya think?” I pointed to the inner planets on the system schematic. “We may end up having to do some planetary mining. Let’s go take a look at some of the rocky planets and see what’s available.”

[Your wish is my command]

We took a few days to get to the fourth planet—I still didn’t want to show all my cards in case someone was watching. GL19-4 was a brown ball of mud with gray oceans and a thick, murky atmosphere. It looked like the result of a lot of volcanic activity, but I didn’t see any immediate candidates in the way of rings or chains of volcanoes.

I inserted myself into a polar orbit and began deep scans for, well, anything, really. Metal deposits, of course, but also volcanic activity, and anything else interesting.

It was one of those good news, bad news situations. Good news, I found lots that was interesting. Bad news, no metals. None. Not within reach of anything in my arsenal, anyway. The planet had a magnetic field, so it obviously had a metallic core. But next to nothing in the crust. Oh, a patch here and a patch there, but not worth grubbing for.

[Anomaly detected]

“And this isn’t anomalous enough already?”

[Double-plus anomaly detected. Better?]

Not loving it quite so much. For a fleeting moment, I thought of reinitializing Guppy. Only for a moment.

Not that I needed to worry. One of our redesign items was to not allow GUPPI to read our thoughts. That was just too creepy. He now required voice commands, however you define voice in a computer system that talks to itself.

“Okay, Guppy, what is it?”

[Accumulation of refined metal detected. An artifact]

“Holy crap.” I thought for a moment. “Deploy three of our exploration drones. Send them down to the location of the anomaly. Have them carry a couple of roamers too. Set one of the drones to spiral outward from the site, while the other two and the roamers investigate the site in detail.”

[Aye]

Guppy was all business now. This was serious. Had Medeiros crashed? Was it a probe from one of the other nations?

The drones got there in record time—I think Guppy might have driven them a little aggressively—and settled around the anomaly. One started to circle, gradually getting farther from the center, while the other two landed and spit out twenty-centimeter roamers. The drones lifted off and started on close-up visual scans.

One thing was obvious right away: this wasn’t one of the probes. In fact, this wasn’t from Earth at all. I couldn’t describe exactly what about it screamed alien, but no human mind designed that. The best metaphor I could come up with was the alien ship in Prometheus. It just didn’t make sense.

I took a moment to savor the thought. I had just found the first intelligent life outside of Earth. Well, okay, looking at the wreck, I might have just found the corpses of the first intelligent life. But still…

It was obvious that this had been some kind of cargo carrier. The thing had crashed and split open. It had spilled out part of its contents, which seemed to consist of stacks and stacks of large metal ingots of various types. Each ingot was pure, all one element. Iron, titanium, copper, nickel, tons of the stuff. The carrier looked like it had only been a quarter full, though, unless some had been taken.

It appeared we had found our metal thieves. Well, one of them. And thief was probably too strong a word. But still…

[Anomaly]

“Oh, for—what now?”

[See for yourself]

I picked up the video that Guppy offered to me. And my jaw dropped. This planet wasn’t lifeless. Well, it was now, but it hadn’t been at some point in the past.

I was looking at a dead ecosystem, what you’d get if everything in the Amazon basin died all at once. It was dry, it was weathered, it was corroded. But it was trees, and bushes, and the occasional animal. And it went on forever.

***

I sent down some biological analysis drones to do some necropsies and try to figure out what had happened here. That wasn’t quite what they were designed for, but I had all the accumulated biological and medical knowledge from Earth, and a very advanced piece of technology designed by, uh, me.

They poked and prodded and cut, and they got some suitable specimens. They had their orders, and the AMIs were entirely competent within the parameters they’d been assigned. I just had to stay out of the way and not joggle their mechanical elbows.

The drones and roamers continued to examine the wreckage. Without being able to say why, I sent a couple of busters down to hover menacingly. Things looked deader than dead, but I just had a spooky feeling.

The report from the biological drones arrived on my desktop with a ding. I hurried over and opened the file.

Oh, wow.

Based on cellular damage, everything had been killed by something along the lines of a gamma ray burst. Basically a huge surge of radiation, more than enough to kill instantly. I knew that because not only had the animals been killed but their intestinal flora (or the local equivalent) had been killed at the same time. There was no bloating, no rotting from the inside out. I had to make some assumptions, using terrestrial analogies, but I was pretty confident that they would be close enough.

I also noted how few carcasses we’d found. The specimens were all small, in odd, inconvenient places, or in poor condition, even for dead bodies. I was pretty sure that 99% of the fauna were unaccounted for.

Without decomposition to provide a clue, I couldn’t immediately tell how long ago this had happened. But wear and erosion on the carcasses and dead trees gave me some indications, as did an analysis of the number of forest fire tracks with no new growth. I estimated somewhere between fifty and a hundred years ago.

I sent the biological drones off to check another couple of points on the planet, especially a point as close to antipodal to this location as possible.

[Emergency! Hostile activity!]

“What? What’s happening?”

[One of the roamers is under attack]

“Get the drones to do point-focused SUDDAR pings. I want as much detail as you can get.”

[Done]

I dissolved my VR and cranked up to maximum frame rate. The video feed was real-time. It showed a window from the perspective of the roamer that was under attack, and another from the perspective of the second roamer. The first roamer seemed to be infested with mechanical ants. As I watched, the roamer was being eaten—metal parts thinning and dissolving.

“Guppy! Blow both roamers. Self-destructs, now!”

Guppy didn’t argue or question. The video feeds disappeared.

“And firewall our device comms. I doubt those things had time to finagle the encryption keys from the roamers, but why take chances?”

I turned to the SUDDAR analysis, which was just assembling over the desk. To one side, Guppy had brought up the video record received from the roamers.

I played back the video record first. The first roamer had opened a container or locker or something. It appeared to have activated the ants. Whether that was a defensive reaction, or the ants just considered the roamer to be a resource to be acquired, was anyone’s guess. I doubted there was really much practical difference. Either way, the ants had started to disassemble the roamer. The SUDDAR point-scan showed that they were separating it by element. They didn’t seem interested in the plastic and ceramic components.

I didn’t regret blowing up the roamers. I certainly couldn’t have brought them back with the possibility of one of those ants coming along for the ride. And, silly as it was, I’d read and seen enough science fiction in my day about advanced technologies taking over the communication system and getting into the computer. That’s me we’re talking about, after all.

I can build more roamers.

Where did the ants get their power from? I scanned the ship again and found that about half of the ants that had survived the roamer suicides were now still. I didn’t know if they were dead or just on standby.

I decided to scan at five-second intervals to see what they were up to. Strangely, every time I scanned, more ants became active. The hell? I cut off the SUDDAR scans for a full minute. When I did another scan, about a quarter of the ants were inactive. Oh, hell. I stopped scanning for five minutes, then did a quick scan, with as low power as I could manage. Sure enough, most of the ants were inactive.

Dammit! They’re powered by the SUDDAR beam. It was my scans that reactivated them.

Well, that was a fine pickle. Any attempt to find out what they were doing would power them up. But that meant that the aliens had found some way to beam power through subspace and use it at the receiving end. I needed to examine those ants.

I waited an hour, then sent a single one-centimeter roamer in. No way an ant could piggy-back undetected on a roamer only slightly bigger than itself. The roamer picked up a couple of ants and brought them out of the hulk. I had prepared a couple of small coffins for the ants, filled with a plastic goop. The roamer stuffed the ants into the goop, then added the hardener. I now had ants under glass, more or less. While they might be able to cut their way out of those, I hoped they couldn’t do it before I completed a scan.

I brought my two drones in close, and they did the most intense and high-precision close-in scans of which they were capable. That would produce almost a molecular-level map of the ants. I watched in fascination as the ants both powered up and produced little cutters from their front appendages. Fortunately they couldn’t move, so all they did was drill a couple of holes in the plastic. Good to know.

I detonated the roamer–can’t be too careful–and retired to my treehouse to ruminate.

***

I had completed my survey. There was no sign of a civilization on this planet, so the wreck was definitely alien. The aliens had come in, presumably killed all life with some kind of radiation weapon, mined the star system, collected the carcasses, then left. There were a lot of assumptions in there, but it fit the evidence.

The scan of the ants had shown some interesting technology. I was already setting up simulations to test some of it.

The scans of the hulk didn’t have any huge surprises. It appeared to be run by an A.I. or AMI of some kind. It had a fusion reactor. It had a SURGE drive. It had a SUDDAR transmitter. However, the SUDDAR unit seemed designed to transmit power to a tuned receiver as well as using the SUDDAR as radar. I’d taken detailed scans of that for further study.

Maybe the aliens had come and rescued the crew and left the hulk. I doubted that. There didn’t really seem to be any accommodation for anything biological. It was probable that the ship was completely A.I. Was this civilization biological at all? The fact that they’d collected all the carcasses hinted at an answer, and not one that I liked at all. I could only think of one reason to bother collecting all that protein.

And was this a one-time event? Or were they raiding systems on an ongoing basis? If so, which way were they heading? I certainly wouldn’t want this fate to befall the Solar System, even if there weren’t any humans left. The dolphins and chimps still deserved their chance.

I felt a pang of disappointment as visions of meeting Vulcans or Asgardians evaporated. This was more like an Alien scenario. As first contact situations went, this one sucked.

Like it or not, I had to bring the other Bobs into this. Which brought up another problem. At this distance, I couldn’t send a message back to Bill. I would need the space station for a transmission, and I would need the raw materials in order to build one. The ore contained in the hulk, even adding in the hulk itself, wasn’t enough.

I would have to leave.





Riker – April 2171 – Sol



The big day had arrived. The colony ships had been checked out end to end, they’d been inspected by the USE delegation, and they’d done a shakedown cruise to Jupiter and back. Now they were parked in low Earth orbit, waiting for their occupants.

Homer was doing a kind of war dance around my captain’s chair, and I was forcibly reminded of my lack of rhythm. The VR upgrades from Bill meant that we Bobs could interact physically instead of just talking to each other through video windows. It had its downsides.

I turned my attention back to the status vids, which showed people lining up for the ground-to-orbit shuttles. Each shuttle could handle five hundred people, packed in like rush-hour commuters.

I remembered my early days as a working stiff, taking the seabus across the harbor twice a day. Hard plastic benches, barely wider than one’s shoulders, arranged in back-to-back rows so you spent the entire trip eye to eye with a total stranger. And that irritating recorded lecture, every single trip, telling you how to use the life jackets. Fun times.

The shuttles carried more people, and the commute to the ship would take a little longer than fifteen minutes, but it would be the same prosaic, boring ride. At the end of it, the passengers would be hustled along to stasis pods, given a sedative, then hooked up and locked into a box the size of a coffin. Hopefully to wake up in less than four years ship’s time, at a new home.

That was the plan, anyway.

Ten shuttles made a total of forty trips to move the USE colonists to the ships. A percentage of the contents of the Svalbard Vaults were loaded onto each colony ship, and the shuttles were docked in the cargo holds.

Then came the inevitable ceremony. Everyone had to make a speech. You’d expect the USE bigwigs to make a speech, but why did the groups from the other side of the planet feel the need? By the time we were half-way through, I had turned off my proprioception emulation to avoid falling over, virtually asleep. I reanimated sandbox Bob to take over the video and try to look attentive.

Eventually, though, they were done. Howard, our newest Bob, was making the flight with them, acting as escort. And, just between Howard and me, to make sure that they behaved at the other end. I hoped that was just excessive paranoia on my part, but I’d loaded Howard’s cargo hold with a few of Bill’s recent inventions, just in case.

The colony ships had a maximum sustained acceleration of 1 g, so the trip would take slightly longer than it would have for a version 1 Bob. They would be on the road for a little over eighteen years. About six years would pass on-board, but no time at all for the colonists in their stasis pods.

The ships were crewed by a couple of Riker clones and a crap-ton of roamers. No need for humans to risk their DNA during the voyage. I had placed the replicant matrices in the ships as one of the final tasks, thereby giving no one time to pull anything underhanded. There had been no hacking attempts, so possibly whoever it was had given up.

The third ship, designated for the Spits and the FAITH enclave, would be leaving in four months. They would establish the first settlement on whichever planet the USE contingent didn’t pick. The first settlement’s job would be to establish sufficient infrastructure for future groups to be able to settle in without undue hardship. It was the price of being first.

Valter was philosophical about that. “Even second prize is still a magnificent gift,” he said in his speech.

Three more vessels were already under construction. Between new builds and returning colony ships, we hoped to maintain a steady stream of exodus from Terra, as long as there were people who wanted to leave. Meanwhile, the resources left behind and the kudzu production would continue to feed an ever-shrinking populace for a long time to come.

I just hoped we’d find more colonizable worlds before people started shooting at each other again.

***

I found myself tearing up just a little as I watched the image in the holotank, which showed the colony ships passing the orbit of Mars. After more than a decade of work, of butting heads with, ahem, a bunch of buttheads, we had actually launched. It was an emotional moment. Even Homer was silent.

Finally, with a groan, I stood up and stretched. “Back to the salt mines.”

Homer grinned at me and pulled up a list. “Stuff for today…”





Bill – May 2172 – Epsilon Eridani



I held an air-horn over my head and pressed the button. A loud blaaaat filled the room. All conversation ceased, as every head turned towards me.

“Hey, everyone. Welcome to the first Bob-moot. I’ve built a matrix here at the Skunk Works that is more than big enough to handle everyone in the bobiverse in VR.”

“Bobiverse? Really?” Garfield gave me the stink-eye.

I laughed. “Just thought of it. I think it’s pretty good, actually.”

“Bobiverse. BobNet. This galaxy may not be big enough for our ego.” Garfield tried his best to look disapproving, but it’s hard to fool yourselves.

I looked around at my audience. Not a huge crowd at this point. I had Riker, Homer, and the other clones from Sol; Bart and his clones in Alpha Centauri; and the Bobs on the way to Omicron2 Eridani with the colonists. That last group would be out of touch in another month or so, when their tau got too high for VR interfacing. Hopefully by then, a few other Bobs would have picked up the SCUT plans and linked in.

Homer cupped his hands around his mouth and gave me a loud boo.

I looked around the group. “Okay, guys. I’m hoping we can make this a regular thing. It helps to keep everyone up to date.”

“Plus it’ll give you an excuse to inflict baseball on us!” Bart yelled.

“I plead the fifth.” I smiled at everyone. “Meanwhile, we have beer. And coffee. And a pub to sit in. Shall we?”

We all popped over to the pub VR and settled into chairs. Time to celebrate.





Khan – April 2185 – 82 Eridani





Do not engage an enemy more powerful than you. And if it is unavoidable and you do have to engage, then make sure you engage it on your terms, not on your enemy’s terms.

… Sun Tzu, Art of War



We slowed down to sub-relativistic speeds well short of 82 Eridani. We wanted plenty of time to scope out the situation, without alerting Medeiros to our presence.

Bill had made good on his promise to avenge Milo. Eight version-3 Bobs, including myself, were poised outside the system, just itching to give Medeiros a piece of our collective mind. But Medeiros had had thirty-five years now to establish himself. None of us thought we’d be able to simply waltz in and whup his butt like back at Epsilon Eridani or Alpha Centauri.

And because we have always been a cautious person, reconnaissance was going to be a major priority. We had two scout probes each, with heavily shielded reactors, three-light-hour-range SUDDARs, and SCUD communications. And booby traps. We didn’t want Medeiros getting hold of any of that tech.

And we had a new weapon in reserve, courtesy of Bill’s Skunk Works.

We deliberately came in from stellar north, at right angles to the plane of the ecliptic. While we didn’t expect Medeiros to be a “two-dimensional thinker”—he was after all, military—we did expect his assets to be mostly along the ecliptic. Our probes should be able to fall through that plane before he could react.

We launched the scouts across a broad front, to get the best overall scan of the system. With no radio emissions and a heavily shielded reactor, there was a good chance most of them would go right through undetected. However, there was no way we were going to get away clean. Our hope was that if Medeiros detected only one or two probes, he would conclude that there was only one Bob out here.

I sent out a meeting invitation to the rest of the squad. Within milliseconds, seven Bobs popped into my VR.

I looked around the table. “Strategy session, boys.”

Hannibal accepted a coffee from Jeeves as he popped up a system schematic. “We will watch for anything hiding behind moons or planets. Not falling for that trick twice. We’ve got a good idea of where things are, thanks to Milo’s preliminary report. We’ll—”

Abruptly, Hannibal disappeared from the VR. We looked at each other in shock, then as one we abandoned our VRs and went into frame-jack.

“Who’s physically closest to Hannibal?” I posed the question in reflex, although I was already checking our deployment diagram. Hannibal was at the end of the line of Bobs, with Tom next to him. “Tom, got a SUDDAR reading?”

Tom’s reponse came back after a millisecond. “I have a very diffuse SUDDAR reading, but no Hannibal. Hold on—”

We waited for an eternal four milliseconds for Tom to continue. “—The diffuse area is spreading and thinning. I’m guessing an explosion of some kind. Everyone might want to do a full sweep, and hang the surprise factor.”

I decided that was a good idea, and I cranked my SUDDAR up to full power, going for a three-light-hour full-spherical ping. The response was negative, except for a vagueness—like a shadow seen out of the corner of your eye—in the direction of the system. I refocused and sent a tight-beam ping in that direction.

Paydirt. “Something is headed our way, guys, at very high speed. And it’s cloaked, or shielded, or something, to the point that I could only see it when I was pinging straight at it.”

Grunts from a few of the others acknowledged the information.

“I’ve got one, too,” Barney reported.

“Same,” from Tom.

It took a few milliseconds to compare notes, and we realized that three unidentified objects were heading our way, and still accelerating. We launched three of our regular probes directly at them, to try to get a visual.

“They’re dodging,” Fred said. “I think they’re expecting the probe to try to ram.”

“Well, not a bad idea if we can manage it,” I responded, “but first we want telemetry.”

It took a little over fifteen minutes, at the combined velocities of the probes and the approaching objects, for them to pass each other. The incoming bogey was still dodging back and forth. The probes were only able to get a frame or two of poor images as they passed by, but they managed full SUDDAR scans.

As the results popped up over our desks, courtesy of SCUT instantaneous communications, there were gasps.

“Nuclear freaking bombs. He’s built fission weapons.”

“With shielded reactors and very, very large SURGE drives,” Fred added.

“That jibes with the readings I’ve been getting. I think Hannibal is just a radioactive cloud, now,” Tom said. “We are screwed.”

“My ass,” I retorted. “How long do we have until they’re close enough to be able to take us out? Tom, do you have a feel for the megatonnage?”

There was a moment of silence, before Tom popped up a sensor readout in our VRs. Because we were still in frame-jack, it wasn’t even paper—just a raw window with a data listing. “Here’s the minmax analysis. We’ve got four minutes—an eternity. No chance to dodge, given their speed and spread. We don’t have time to get outside the blast radii.”

“So,” Kyle said. “Medeiros seems to have set this up well. He probably thinks he’s outflanked us, but good.”

I smiled at Kyle’s dry delivery. “Mmm-hmm. Okay, let’s melt them down. Two Bobs per bomb, and I’ll add a follow-up shot if needed. Everyone acknowledge when charged.”

We were about to roll out our secret weapon. Bill had taken the light-saber tech, which was essentially a high-temperature ionized plasma in a magnetic bottle, and used it to build something new. He found a way to project the plasma, and the magnetic field with it, like a torpedo. The result was a million-degree, highly-charged spear that splashed against whatever it ran into and generally melted right through it, while delivering a very localized EMP. The weapon had been tested extensively at Epsilon Eridani, but this would be the first real-world use.

When everyone indicated a full charge, I said, “Fire.”

Six plasma spikes shot out at close to light-speed. One of the biggest advantages to this weapon was that it was invisible to SUDDAR, since there was very little actual mass involved. And any other form of detection was limited by light-speed. The plasma spikes couldn’t follow a dodging target, but the target wouldn’t know they were coming until they arrived.

It took only moments for the spikes to cross the distance, and all three shadows disappeared. Full-on SUDDAR pings, at the narrowest and most intense setting, detected nothing but small fragmentary blips.

Ned spoke for all of us. “Well, that was unsettling.”

Fred added, “We were barely able to detect those things at all, and even that only because of Bill’s SUDDAR improvements. Did Medeiros invent some kind of SUDDAR cloaking?”

“I doubt it,” I answered. “He never struck us as anything but career military. I think it’s more likely that the Brazilian Empire had this tech developed back on Earth. They may have uploaded all their top-secret military tech to him before sending him out. That would explain the nukes, too.”

“So this might not be the last surprise.”

A round of curses and grunts answered that statement.

There was silence for a few moments before Ned spoke up again. “I guess we need to have another strategy session.”

***

“Cloaking?” Bill’s face was a study in surprised interest.

“Yup. That’s the only explanation we can come up with.” I replayed the entire sequence for him in a window, including popups of the sensor readings of the bombs.

“Well, crap. See if you can grab a sample or something. Meanwhile, I’ll work on it from this end. I guess the element of surprise is gone, though.” Bill gave me an informal salute and disappeared.

Great. Eight of us—no, seven, now—against an unknown number and disposition of Medeiri. I did not like the odds.

“Meeting!” I called out.

Six other Bobs popped into my VR.

“Bill didn’t have much for us. He pointed out, quite correctly, that if we leave now with the intention of coming back, Medeiros will be even more prepared for us. He suggests we get our backups up to date and dive in.”

“Easy for him to say.” That was from Elmer, who had never been particularly enthusiastic about this venture. I think maybe quantum differences had left him a little light in the spine department. I was reminded of Bill Paxton’s character in Aliens.

I glared at Elmer for a second, then continued. “We have the plasma spikes, and we have the busters, with the new controlled fusion detonation. It’s not a lot. Best we can do, I think, is raise some hell before he takes us out. Make sure your dead-mans are in order, do a differential, and kiss your asses goodbye. We’re going in.”

With that, the Bobs disappeared from my VR, seven ships turned toward the center of the system, and we began to accelerate in at 10 g.

***

The first part of our dive into the inner system was relatively easy. Medeiros was still working on the assumption that we all had the same SUDDAR, and that he could see anything we launched at him. By the time we’d destroyed a half-dozen of his flying bombs, I guess he finally got the memo.

SUDDAR area pings showed everything with a SURGE drive scattering in all directions. At the same time, over a hundred fusion sources lit up the area and started to move. Decoys, I guess. Effective, too. We had no way to know which ones were real targets.

“Meeting!”

As soon as the other Bobs showed up, I started. “Okay, some of these fusions sources are decoys. Probably most. But some will be Medeiri, and some will be weapons. And there will be cloaked bombs as well. Suggestions?”

Elmer spoke up first, which surprised me.

“The bombs need to be within a certain distance to do any harm. If we move as a unit and assign certain Bobs to watching for the cloaked devices, we should be able to prevent any from getting too close.”

“And,” Fred cut in, “if we destroy any decoys that get within that range as well, we might be okay.”

“Certainly better than splitting up,” I conceded. “But the plasma spikes are only useful until Medeiros figures it out and starts jinking around. Plus, recharging the spike cannons takes time. They aren’t like Hollywood six-shooters.”

“Then we need to do as much damage as possible before he figures it out,” Tom said decisively. “Let’s just start blasting. Maybe no plan will throw him off a bit.”

That was just stupid enough to be brilliant. We looked at each other wordlessly, nodded, and got to work.



It became a game of cat and mouse. Medeiros knew that we had something that could destroy his units without warning. He may have thought it was a cloaked missile. He reacted by scattering his units and using the decoys to distract us. We destroyed many units, but had no idea if we were destroying anything useful.

Finally came the moment we’d been dreading. One of Medeiros’s units dodged several plasma spikes and managed to get within detonation range. Barely. The resulting EMP and blast of radiation played hell with internal systems for a few moments. Fortunately the version-3 Heavens had multiple redundancies. Five of us were able to continue. The other two must have lost too much functionality. Their dead-mans activated and they disappeared in reactor overload. I hoped Fred and Jackson’s backups were recent and complete.

But Medeiros must have twigged to the fact that our weapon didn’t chase its target. In the time that it took him to send out commands at light-speed, every Medeiros-controlled unit in the system was bearing down on us, jinking like crazy.

“Plan B, guys. Split up and do as much damage as possible.”

We headed off in random directions, jinking as well.

While we ran, I did an analysis from the recorded telemetry of Medeiros’s change in tactics. His units were given orders via radio. The ones closest to Medeiros would have started the new tactic first, followed by units farther away as the signal spread from the center. The center, of course, was Medeiros.

It took about forty milliseconds to determine where he must be, to within a few thousand km. That was too large an area for random plasma spike shots, but not too large for intelligent busters on a mission. I transmitted the coordinates to the other Bobs, and we simultaneously launched every buster we had. At the same time, we all activated SUDDAR jamming at maximum intensity. Everyone in the system was now blind, except for traditional visual and radar. The trick would be to keep it going until—

Hector and Tom’s SCUT signals cut off without warning. I felt a pang of sorrow. They’d almost certainly been caught by a nuke. That left three of us, plus whatever busters were still going. I kept spiking fusion sources as best I could. The AMI pilots tended to be a little predictable. Many of them settled into a pattern of dodges that I could predict after several iterations.

Then Barney dropped out. That left just Elmer and me. I had to give him credit. Now that things had hit the fan, he was no longer whining about the danger. I mentally upgraded him to Michael Biehn.

Two nukes went off around me almost at the same time. They must have been a little impatient, or saw their solution deteriorating, because the distance was a little too great for annihilation. Not too great for damage, though. I was dead in the water for several minutes while Guppy scrambled the roamers to replace or reroute systems.

“You okay, Khan?” It was Elmer, checking up on me.

“A little damage. Roamers are on it. Don’t try to cover me. We don’t want to present a single target.”

“No problem, dude. Having some fun of my own over here…”

[SURGE drive online]

That’s what I wanted to hear.

I jammed the gas pedal all the way down to emergency level, and shot away at 15 g. I wasn’t able to keep that up long, but it saved my bacon, as another nuke went off behind me, just out of range.

Finally, just when I had about decided I’d had enough excitement for the century, the busters converged on the point in space where we believed Medeiros to be. Remote telemetry showed forty-four busters bearing down on three Brazilian probes. The Medeiri must have finally gotten a visual warning, because they turned and scattered. But it was far too late. At least half of the busters made contact of some kind before there wasn’t anything left that was big enough to register as a target.

Just one small problem. Destroying Medeiros didn’t deactivate his units. We were still being chased by dozens of fusion signatures, at least some of which were real threats.

“Got any ideas, Elmer?”

“How’s your equipment, Khan?”

“Well, I’m going to need new underwear, but I’m still running.”

“I’m not so good. My SURGE has gone intermittent, and I don’t have time or parts to fix it.”

Elmer was silent for a moment, and sympathy and sadness washed over me. He was screwed, and we both knew it.

“I’ve updated a differential to Bill, so to quote the Celine Dion song—”

“Oh, please don’t, Elmer.”

He laughed. “Gotcha. So you turn off your SUDDAR jamming and run silent out of here. I’ll keep blinding everyone until the last moment. Give Bill my regards.”

“Will do, buddy. Sayonara.”

“Hasta la vista, baby.”

I did as he said. Once my SUDDAR emitter went silent, the Brazilian units locked onto the only bright source of SUDDAR in the area. As I ran from the area, Elmer’s relayed telemetry showed close to fifty units converging. Then he was gone.

***

I coasted for two weeks to get far enough away from 82 Eridani before I reactivated all systems. I had given a full report to Bill, and I spent the time doing more thorough repairs. The last thing I needed was equipment failure halfway between stars.

Of the eight Bobs that went to 82 Eridani, I was the only one left. I think we took the Medeiri out, so I guess it was a success from that point of view. But I couldn’t convince myself that the whuppin’ had all been one-way.

I popped into Bill’s VR. “Hey, Bill.”

“Hi, Khan.” Bill gave a flash of a smile. “I still can’t say that without wanting to yell it.”

We shared the standard laugh. Good names were getting a little scarce, and I was glad to have picked one that had some nerd lore behind it.

“Did we get all the backups?”

Bill shook his head, looking unhappy. “Three didn’t complete. SCUT bandwidth just isn’t dependable enough. Lots of dropped packets and re-sends. I’ve added them to the In Memorium list.”

“Elmer?”

Bill smiled, a small sad smile. “He made it. Guess he surprised all of us, right?”

I nodded, and let the silence extend for a few milliseconds.

“We’re going to have to go back, you know.”

Bill nodded. “We don’t know for sure that we got all the Medeiri, even if we got all the active ones. And those AMI units will still be wandering around, looking for things to blow up.” Bill waved a hand. “And, not to put too fine a point on it, I have to find out how he’s doing that cloaking. That’s a real danger to us.”

I rubbed my chin in thought for a second, then looked at my hand in amusement. We Bobs were so used to VR now that we felt fully human most of the time. But once in a while the incongruousness of an action would jerk one of us back to reality.

“Bill, I want to be in on the next wave. I owe that to the guys we lost. It will take me thirteen years to get back, so load my backup into one of the new ships. I’ll send you a full, and let me know if it comes through, okay?”

Bill nodded.

I gave him a salute and disappeared from his VR.

Medeiros, I’m coming back for you.





Howard – September 2188 – Omicron2 Eridani



We’d arrived.

I can’t even begin to describe the feelings of joy and relief as I passed the Kuiper belt and officially entered the Omicron2 Eridani system. No Vulcan cruisers flew up to intercept us, so I added a few to my VR. Just because.

I did a quick scan of the system to confirm Milo’s survey results and verify our orientation to the ecliptic plane. The two colony ships, Bert and Ernie—yeah, they named themselves that, yes, voluntarily—came into the system at a much more sedate 1 g deceleration. They would arrive at Vulcan and Romulus a week or two behind me.

I’d been thinking off and on about what it would be like to be a colony ship. The guys would be essentially running a shuttle service for up to a couple of centuries. Fly to Earth, fly to Vulcan. Fly to Earth, fly somewhere else. Rinse, repeat. On the other hand, they were doing a very valuable service for humanity. Any Bob could appreciate that.

And with our arrival, humanity now officially no longer had all its eggs in one basket. Now perhaps we could start to think about breathing a little easier. But just a little.

I dropped into the L4 point between Vulcan and Romulus and dropped a beacon. We would set up there to do initial recon and to give Colonel Butterworth and his people a chance to make a decision. Since I had ten days or so to kill, I send some exploration drones to each planet to expand on Milo’s survey information. Then I settled back with a cup of coffee to relax.

Milo had left a couple of AMIs and a bunch of autofactory drones behind to continue mining the system. The drones put the refined metals into bundles of ingots and set beacons on them. With a couple of decades of peace and quiet, the automation had accumulated several hundred thousand tons of ready-to-use material, all in orbit inside the asteroid belt. Riker had started the AMI on building a farming donut a decade ago, to provide a backup food source. It would need only to be seeded from the stocks we’d brought with us. I hoped we wouldn’t need it. Of course, I didn’t hope that anything like as strongly as the colonists would. Kudzu was apparently not the food of the gods, although deities were often invoked when describing it.

I had quick conversations with Bill and Riker, just to let them know we’d made it. Full reports would follow. Riker gave me a list of colony ships that were already launched and on their way.

Hmm, but no pressure, right?

***

Exodus-1 and Exodus-2 settled into orbit without a hitch. We had a brief flurry of SCUT exchanges, then Bert and Ernie shut down the drives and went to station-keeping.

“Welcome to the home of Spock, boys.” I popped into the common VR and grinned at them. They were grinning back, of course. After all, Bob. Bert and Ernie had adopted Battlestar Galactica-style uniforms and command deck VRs. I was a little surprised by that, as it hadn’t been one of my favorite shows. Although the Cylons were definitely bad-ass.

“I was seriously considering putting up a couple of Vulcan cruisers to escort us in,” Ernie said.

I felt my face turn red, and Bert started laughing so hard he almost lost his seat.

We took a minute to enjoy the joke—belly laughs are one of the best things about being sentient, and you should never miss a chance for one. We wiped the tears from our eyes, and I pulled up a holo of the system, with Vulcan and Romulus showing in an inset window.

“We’ll want to push Butterworth to make a decision as quickly as possible. I want the colonists offloaded at the earliest possible date, and you guys on your way back to Earth.” I gestured toward the holo. “Butterworth already has Milo’s survey results, and I’ve been adding to the data. This isn’t going to be a negotiation. He picks A or B, and we move.”

Ernie nodded. “Guppy advises me that Butterworth has come out of stasis, and he’ll be ready to talk within an hour. I’ll package it up for him, let him have some quiet time to study it. Meeting in, say, three hours?”

Bert and I nodded, and we moved on to the next item.

***

“There really was never much doubt,” Colonel Butterworth said with a smile. The video showed him sitting in the Exodus-1’s common room. “Barring significant new information coming up at this end, Vulcan makes much more sense. We will need time to establish our own food production, so a robust ecosystem will bridge that gap for us.” He nodded to the camera. “Thank you for confirming biocompatibility of the local ecosystem. It settles a lot of uncertainties.”

I smiled in acknowledgement. Colonel Butterworth had become much more relaxed now that his civilian population seemed to have a future.

He continued in a distracted voice, “We’ll hopefully be in a position to help out the Spits when they show up, until they have their food production set up.” He arched an eyebrow at me. “Farm-1 won’t be producing yet, right?”

“Not yet, Colonel. But since most of the colonists will stay in stasis until we’re ready for them, ships stores will be sufficient for the first month.”

Colonel Butterworth grunted. “Still tighter than I like.”

The Colonel stared, rapt, at the virtual bulletin board that Bert had provided. The board showed real-time status of all current, upcoming, and completed colony setup activities. Video windows showed a constant rotation of views.

Setup crews were awake and had begun shuttling printers down to Vulcan. On the surface, roamers were printing out modular residential units and assembling them. AMI-controlled bobcats and backhoes stayed just ahead of the construction, preparing the ground for the houses.

In two days, we would start waking the first wave of civilians and shuttling them down to their new homes. And the universe would have actual Vulcans.

Roddenberry would be proud.





Charles

One of Riker’s early clones.



Charlie

Bob’s Deltan-configured android.



Minister Michael Cranston

Leader of the FAITH post-war enclave, and of the FAITH Romulus colony.



Cruella

Deltan medicine woman.



Dexter

One of Charles’ clones, who takes over for Howard at Omicron2 Eridani.



Diana

Archimedes’ mate. Deltan native.



Donald

Arnold’s son. Deltan native.



Dopey

One of Mario’s clones, part of the group who work to establish the Others’ range.



Minister Sharma

UN rep for the Maldives on post-war Earth.



Garfield

Bill’s first clone, and his assistant in Epsilon Eridani.



Goku

One of Bill’s clones. He and Calvin battle and defeat Medeiros in Alpha Centauri.



Guppy

Bob’s personification of the GUPPI interface. Various Bobs give Guppy different levels of system resources, resulting in slightly different behavior.



Hal

One of Mario’s clones, part of the group who work to establish the Others’ range.



Hoffa

Deltan native, council leader in Camelot.



Homer

Riker’s first clone, assists in the Battle of Sol and invents the Farm Donuts.



Howard

One of Charles’ clones. He accompanies the first two colony ships to Omicron2 Eridani and stays to act as the resident replicant.



Howie

Bridget and Stephane’s son, named after Howard.



Hungry

One of Mario’s clones, and part of the group that works to establish the Other’s range.



Linus

One of Bill’s clones. He goes to Epsilon Indi and discovers Henry Roberts, the Australian probe replicant.



Luke

One of Bob’s clones in Delta Eridani.



Manny

The first anthromorphic android, used by Howard on Vulcan.



Mario

One of Bob’s first clones. Mario is somewhat misanthropic and takes off for GL 54, where he discovers evidence of the Others, and sets up a program to determine their range.



Marvin

One of Bob’s clones in Delta Eridani. Marvin hangs around and assists Bob.



Major Ernesto Medeiros

The Brazilian Empire replicant. Brazil sends out a number of copies, which keep popping up to bedevil the Bobs.



Milo

One of Bob’s first cohort of clones in Epsilon Eridani. Milo goes to Epsilon2 Eridani, where he discovers the double planets which he names Vulcan and Romulus. He then goes to 82 Eridani where he runs into Medeiros.



Moses

Deltan Native. An elder who teaches Archimedes how to work flint.



Oliver

Bill’s clone, who sets up in Alpha Centauri after Bart’s departure.



Riker

One of Bob’s first cohort of clones in Epsilon Eridani. Riker takes on the task of going back to Sol to find out what happened, and ends up in charge of the Earth’s emigration effort.



Henry Roberts

The Australian replicant



Rocky

Garfield’s attempt at a flying android.



Sam

Exodus-3 controlling replicant.



Bridget Sheehan

Senior Biologist in the Vulcan colony and Howard’s eventual love interest.



Sleepy

One of Mario’s clones, and part of the effort to determine the Others’ range.



Surly

One of Bill’s clones and part of the second expedition to 82 Eridani to oust Medeiros.



Gudmund Valter

The Spitsbergen enclave leader on post-war Earth.



Verne

One of Bill’s clones and part of the second expedition to 82 Eridani to oust Medeiros



Bertram Vickers

Head of VEHEMENT



Victor

One of Bob’s later clones in Delta Eridani. Takes off after Bender to find out what happened to him.









1. Sky God

Bob

February 2167

Delta Eridani

An angry squeal erupted from the pile of deadwood. The two Deltans paused, poised to retreat. Seeing no further response, they resumed pelting the area with rocks. The individual I had named Bernie, his fur erect along his spine and ears straight out with excitement, chanted, “Here, kuzzi, kuzzi, kuzzi.”

I moved my observation drone to the rear to get out of their line of sight. They were okay with me observing the hunt, but I didn’t want to distract them when even a slight misstep could result in injury or death. Mike glanced up at the movement, but the Deltans otherwise paid no attention to the football-sized drone.

Someone must have scored a direct hit with a rock. Screaming like an irate steam engine, the pigoid erupted from the entrance to its den. The two rock-throwers sprinted out of the way and the other hunters moved up. Each braced the butt of his spear on the ground and placed a foot on the end to hold it in place.

The pigoid reached the hunting group in less than a second, screaming in rage. The Deltans held their positions with all the courage of medieval pikemen facing a cavalry charge. Even though I watched the action remotely via a floating observation drone, I could still feel my nether regions puckering up in fear. At times like this, I wondered if I hadn’t gone a little overboard with the level of detail in my virtual-reality environment. There was no reason for me to even have nether regions, let alone for them to pucker.

The pigoid crashed into the waiting spears without slowing. Fast, yes. Smart, not so much. I’d never seen a pigoid try to dodge the spear points. One of the hunters, Fred, was thrown to the side as his spear bowed and then snapped. He screamed, either in pain or surprise, and blood spurted from his leg. A distracted part of my mind noted that Deltan blood was almost the same shade of red as human blood.

The other Deltans held fast, and the pigoid was lifted right into the air by the leverage of their spears. It hung in midair for a moment, then crashed to the ground with a final screech. The Deltan hunters waited for any more movement, lips drawn back to show their impressive canines. Occasionally, a pigoid would get back up after this level of mistreatment and wade in for another round. No one wanted to be caught with their guard down.

Bernie sidled up with his spear in one hand and a club in the other. Stretching as far as he could with the spear, he poked the pigoid in the snout. When there was no reaction, he turned to his fellow hunters and grinned.

Not literally, of course. The Deltan equivalent of a grin was an ear-waggle, but I was so used to the Deltan mannerisms that I no longer needed to consciously interpret. And the translation software took care of speech, converting idiom and metaphor between English and Deltan. I had assigned arbitrary human names to individuals to help me keep track of everyone.

Truthfully, humans and Deltans would never communicate without a translator. Deltan speech sounded to human ears like a series of grunts, growls, and hiccups. According to Archimedes, my main contact among the Deltans, human speech sounded like two pigoids in a mating frenzy. Nice.

The Deltans looked like a kind of a bat/pig mashup—barrel bodies, spindly limbs, large mobile ears, and snouts not too different from a boar’s. Their fur was mainly gray, with tan patterns around the face and head unique to each individual. The Deltans were the first non-human intelligence I’d ever encountered, in only the second star system I had visited since leaving Earth more than thirty years ago. It made me wonder if intelligent life was perhaps as common as Star Trek would have us believe.

Bill regularly transmitted his news blogs from Epsilon Eridani, but they were nineteen years old by the time I received them. If any of the other Bobs had found intelligence, Bill might not even have received the reports yet, let alone re-transmitted them to the rest of us.

I returned my attention to the Deltans as they began to organize their post-hunt routine.

The hunters checked on Fred, who was sitting on a rock, swearing in Deltan and pressing on the wound to staunch the bleeding. I moved the drone in to get a close look, and one of the group moved aside to give me a better view.

Fred had been lucky. The gash from the splintered spear was jagged but not deep, and appeared clean. If the pigoid had gotten its teeth into him, he’d be dead.

Mike made a show of trying to poke the wound with his spear. “Does that hurt? Does that hurt?”

Fred showed his teeth. “Yeah, funny. Next time you can have the bad spear.”

Mike smiled back, unrepentant, and Bernie slapped Fred on the shoulder. “Come on, don’t be a baby. It’s almost stopped bleeding.”

“Right, let’s get this thing hung and bled.” Matching action to words, Mike unwound his rope from around his torso. He flipped the rope over a convenient tree branch, and Bernie tied the rear legs of the carcass.

Knot-making skills, not so good. The rope-work was rudimentary, and probably slipped occasionally. I made a mental note to teach Archimedes some sailing knots.

Mike and Bernie strung up the carcass and proceeded to field-dress their kill, while the other Deltans started a Giving-Thanks chant. As I watched, I had one of those incongruous moments where I half-expected them to attach a hunting tag to its ear. Wrong century, wrong planet, wrong species, of course.



I turned away from the drone’s video window and chuckled as I picked up my coffee. Marvin, who had been watching over my shoulder, gave me a strange look, but I didn’t feel the need to explain. Hell, he should be able to remember Original Bob going hunting with Dad, way back when. I shrugged at him without comment. Work it out, dude.

Marvin rolled his eyes and returned to the La-Z-Boy that he always materialized when he was visiting my VR. I spared a moment to let Jeeves refresh my coffee. As in every virtual reality space that implemented the Jeeves A.I., he resembled John Cleese in tux and tails.

As I took a sip—perfect, as always—I looked around the library from my seat in one of the antique wingback chairs. Floor-to-ceiling bookshelves, a large, old-fashioned fireplace, and tall, narrow windows through which a perpetual late-afternoon sun shone to illuminate the interior. And like a giant shiny black eye, one red corduroy La-Z-Boy, occupied by a clone of yours truly.

All in VR, of course. Physically, Marvin and I were a couple of glowing opto-electronic cubes, installed in the two spaceships currently orbiting Delta Eridani 4. But we had been human once, and our VR environments kept us sane.

Spike wandered over, jumped up onto Marvin’s lap, and began to purr. The cat’s A.I. was realistic, right down to the total lack of loyalty. I gave a small snort of amusement and turned back to the video window.



The hunters had finished field-dressing their kill. The pigoid didn’t really look like a wild boar. It was probably closer to a bear in general outline, but it filled the same ecological niche as a boar, complete with the same sunny disposition and affectionate behavior.

Hunting them wasn’t a one-sided proposition by any means. The Deltans took a chance on every pigoid hunt. The pigoid usually lost, but it sometimes managed to take down one or two of the hunters. The recent addition of flint tips to the spears was changing the game, though. Yeah, I know. Prime Directive, blah, blah. Pfft. This wasn’t Star Trek, despite Riker’s choice of name and VR theme.

The Deltans trussed their prize to a couple of spears, and four of them hoisted the ends of the spears to their shoulders. Mike beckoned with a gesture, and I maneuvered the drone over to float along beside him. Two others put their arms around Fred and helped him to his feet. His leg hadn’t quite stopped bleeding, and he showed a pronounced limp, but he’d make it back to the village.

We marched triumphantly towards the Deltans’ home, a couple of the hunters singing a victory chant. The others traded good-natured jokes and insults as they compared notes. I never ceased to be amazed at how very similar in behavior the Deltans were to humans. It made me feel nostalgic, occasionally, for genuine human contact.

We soon arrived at the village, greeted by laughter and celebration. A pigoid kill was always a happy event—the hexghi would have a feast tonight, and would eat well for a week. Hexghi translated as something like families of our fire. Of course, it flowed a lot better in Deltan. This hunting group was part of Archimedes’ hexghi, which I’d more or less adopted as family.

Fred was helped over to his family’s spot, where his mate proceeded to fuss over him. One of the hunters hurried off to get the medicine woman, Cruella. I sighed and prepared myself for yet another argument with her.

The messenger returned moments later with Cruella and her apprentice in tow. Cruella bent down to examine the wound, and I brought the drone in close. Too close, I guess. Cruella straight-armed the drone and it shot back several feet before the AMI controller was able to stabilize it. The other Deltans stepped back in shock, and one looked like he was going to either flee or faint. The drone was small, and really not hard to push around. But still, y’know, sky god.

I’d long since learned that the medicine woman feared no one and nothing. And she wasn’t particularly good at taking advice, either. I gritted my teeth in frustration, wondering if this time Cruella would pay attention to anything that I’d told her.

Fred apparently was having the same thought. “This would be a good time to try Bawbe’s hot-water thing,” he said to her.

Cruella glared at him, then at my drone. “Maybe he can just dress the wound as well, since you don’t seem to need me.”

“Oh, by the balls of my ancestors, Cruella,” Mike said. “Try something new, just once. Bawbe hasn’t steered us wrong yet.”

Cruella snarled at him. Within moments, the hunters and Cruella had faced off in a yelling match. The hunters were my biggest supporters. Flint tips, spear straighteners, and hand axes were only a few of the improvements that I’d brought to their lives. They, at least, trusted that I had the Deltans’ best interests at heart.

Finally, Cruella threw her hands in the air and barked, “Fine! We’ll do it your way. And if your leg falls, off, don’t come whining to me.”

She turned to her apprentice and snarled an order. The apprentice flattened her ears and ran off.

Minutes later she was back, carrying a bladder and a soft leather skin. Cruella pointed to the bladder and said, “Freshly boiled water.” She held up the soft piece of scraped skin and said, “Washed in boiling water.” Then she glared right into the drone’s camera. “Now stay out of my way.”

I watched in pleased surprise as she took the time to clean the wound with the piece of hide, using the freshly boiled water. This was progress. Granted, the hunters helped a lot by putting their collective foot down; but if Cruella got into the habit, incidents of infection would drop dramatically.

I bobbed the drone once in acknowledgement, then sent it off to station-keeping at the perimeter of the village. I returned to my VR once again, sat back, and closed the drone’s video window. The change in procedure by the medicine woman was a major victory, and I was happy to get out of her way in return. It would allow her to save face, and she wouldn’t feel the need to dig in her heels next time.

I’d miss the rest of the celebration, but the pigoid’s ultimate fate was a matter of routine, and well-documented. And probably delicious. I thought of ribs in barbeque sauce and my mouth watered. I didn’t need food any more, being a computer and all, but I could do anything I wanted in VR. And if you’re going to program in a coffee simulation, you might as well program in barbequed ribs.

Spike came walking across my desk, meowed once, and plunked down on my keyboard. I accepted a coffee refill from Jeeves, then turned to Marvin. “Okay. Excitement’s over. What’s up? You wanted to talk to me about something?”

Marvin nodded and stood. He dismissed the La-Z-Boy and walked over to my work desk. Pulling up a wingback, he invoked a globe of Eden in mid-air over the desk, with a small section of one continent outlined in red. “This is the current range of the Deltans. I’ve excluded the old village, since they no longer live there—”

“—and that was more of a refuge than a permanent home.” I nodded. “They hadn’t even been there for a full generation.”

Marvin bobbed his head in acknowledgement. “Anyway, I’ve been doing a lot of digging—literally, in some cases—and I’ve arrived at a reasonable estimate of Deltan population movements over time.”

He looked at me expectantly, and I made a rolling motion with my hand for him to continue.

“They do not appear to be from this area at all. It looks as though the sentient Deltan subspecies originated here…” Marvin rotated the globe and pointed to a different part of the continent. “…and moved from there to the current location.”

“And they’re no longer at the old location? Why?”

“That’s what I don’t get, Bob. I’ve found a lot of evidence of abandoned Deltan villages, and some burial sites, but not nearly enough graves to account for the expected population.”

“Predation?”

“You’d think, but then we’d find Deltan remains here and there, at least in the form of piles of bones. You’ve seen what the gorilloids leave behind when they’re done with a meal. They’re not fastidious.”

I rubbed my chin, gazing at the globe. “That doesn’t make sense, anyway. From your notes, the original area didn’t have gorilloids at all. So they moved from a safer area to a more dangerous area, and disappeared in the safer area.”

“Then fled the more dangerous area to set up in an even more dangerous area.” Marvin shook his head in confusion. “They aren’t morons. They may be just in the process of becoming human-level sentient, but they have common sense. We’re missing something.”

I shrugged, and sent the globe spinning with a flick of a finger. “It’s a mystery, Marvin, and we do love a mystery.” We exchanged grins. After all, Bob. “But the important thing is that they’re much safer here, compared to where we found them. They’ve settled in nicely in Camelot, the hunting’s good, and the gorilloids are beginning to get the hint and have pretty much stopped trying to pick off Deltans.”

“You’re really going to call their village Camelot?” Marvin gave me the stink-eye. “Every time you say it, I hear Knights of the Round Table.”

I grinned at him and waggled my eyebrows. “It’s only a model.”

Marvin rolled his eyes and stopped the globe. “Anyway, I’ll keep at this, but we’re at a disadvantage here. On Earth, scientists were building up from existing knowledge of a world they understood. On Eden, we’re starting from scratch.”

“Yeah, and even then, it took years for them to figure out things like the fate of the Anasazi.” I sat back and shook my head. “Yeah, I get it, Marv. I have to admit, I’m glad this is a pet project for you. I did some basic research and exploration when I landed, but it wasn’t a priority for me.”

Marvin chuckled and, with a parting nod, disappeared back to his own VR.





2. Colony Site

Howard

September 2188

Vulcan

Colonization of a new planet was always so easy in science fiction. Actually, scratch that. It was never easy. Something always came out of the woodwork to endanger the colony. Well, they got one thing right. Sort of.

On the plus side, nothing was bursting out of people’s chests. However, setting up a human colony on Vulcan was turning out to be a little bit like being pecked to death by ducks. Large ducks. With teeth and claws. Milo’s notes and planetary catalog made it very clear that setting up would require attention to defensive strategies. The ecosystem was prolific and competitive.

The colony ships Exodus-1 and -2 orbited Vulcan, most of the colonists from the USE enclave still in stasis, waiting for the settlement teams to prepare a site. Construction teams, security teams, and engineers worked day and night to clear enough jungle and build a home for this first wave of humanity.

The USE colonists would also be expected to provide some support to future colony ships. Exodus-3 was only a few months behind us, and more would be coming as fast as Riker could build them.

Like we needed the extra pressure.

Five days after humans set foot on Vulcan, the planet claimed its first casualty.



[Message from the security chief. There has been an attack]

I nodded to Guppy, acknowledging the information. I took a moment to minimize the monitoring window that had been floating in the air in front of me, and ordered the construction AMIs to continue on their own. They could handle most of the tasks involved in building the orbiting farm donut, and they would text me if they ran into something above their pay grade.

I turned in my chair and raised an eyebrow at Guppy, inviting more information. But the GUPPI system interface, in the form of an avatar resembling Admiral Ackbar, wasn’t inclined to volunteer anything beyond the basic facts. Huge fish eyes blinked at me, waiting for a command. Accepting the inevitable, I motioned with my hand, and he pushed the video window to me.

The window showed the head of security, Stéphane Brodeur, with that look people get when they’re on an adrenaline high—wide eyes, slight sheen of sweat, nostrils dilated. He began to speak as soon as he saw me. “There has been an attack. The therapod-like predators that we’ve tagged as raptors. Northwest corner, at the fence construction boundary.”

Brodeur spoke with a pronounced Quebecois accent. I wondered idly how he had managed to get into the USE colony, but dismissed the question as irrelevant. I frame-jacked for a moment and sent a couple of drones to the fence construction area, then returned my frame rate to normal. A human being wouldn’t even notice the millisecond glitch in my image. “Casualties?”

“One.”

“Dead?”

“No, but it will need the new paint job.” Brodeur grinned at me.

I raised an eyebrow, and he continued, “A small group of raptors attacked a backhoe. The equipment will need the paint touched up. We killed most of the animals, and the rest ran off. One of the carcasses is being sent to Dr. Sheehy for necropsy.”

“So what can I do?”

The security chief shook his head. “About the attack, nothing. It’s done, and we’ve taken care of the attackers. I am hoping you can set up surveillance of some kind.”

A reasonable request. I nodded in thought. “Mr. Brodeur, I have some drones I can put on guard duty now, although they aren’t really optimized for that. Bill, over in Epsilon Eridani, has been refining surveillance and exploration drones for a couple of decades now. I’ll get some plans from him and start printing up something suitable. It’ll take a week or two before they’re ready. Can you hold out?”

“I will talk to the construction chief and see if we can cut back on some of the tasks until you’re done. We would be spread too thin, right now.”

“Do that, Chief. I’ll keep you updated.”

I closed the connection, and sent an email to Bill, requesting information on his observation drones. He’d designed them more for use by Bobs exploring new systems, but they’d do fine for my purposes as well.

* * *

Security personnel were still swarming the area when my drones arrived at the fence construction site. Blood covered the ground, fortunately all raptor. A very sad-looking backhoe sat off to one side, long scrapes and scratches marring the bright yellow paint job. I wondered idly if the backhoe’s AMI controller would need therapy.

Personnel were hauling several carcasses into the back of transport trucks. The raptors resembled movie velociraptors closely enough to give nightmares to anyone who’d seen Jurassic Park. But instead of the peg-like teeth of the canonical carnosaur, their teeth resembled those of sharks—triangular, serrated, and razor sharp. So far, the use of military-grade automatic weapons on them hadn’t blunted their enthusiasm for the newly arrived food group.

I found Chief Brodeur overseeing the cleanup and floated over to him.

He turned as the drone approached and grinned. “And to think I turned down the desk job.”

I chuckled politely in response. “Welcome to the frontier. Did you get all of them?”

“No.” He shook his head. “We let one or two get away to communicate fear of humans to their friends.”

“And how’s that working out, so far?”

Chief Brodeur laughed and shook his head. “I have a meeting with the colonel this afternoon. Perhaps you could attend.”

“He’s already invited me, Mr. Brodeur. I’ll see you there.”

Chief Brodeur nodded to the drone, then turned back to help his staff with cleanup. I took the opportunity to inspect the progress on construction.

A fence stretched about a third of the way around the planned town site. Five meters tall, it was built from a combination of native wood and metal. The Vulcan trees were close enough to their Terran equivalents that the setup crews were able to adapt them with little effort. The trees were harvested from the area immediately around the fence, forming a clear-cut for additional security. I had my doubts about whether the fence was tall enough to keep the brontos at bay, but no one had asked me. Not that the brontos would eat people or anything. They were more of an “accidentally step on you” kind of danger.

To the west, Vulcan’s sister planet Romulus hung in the sky, clouds and seas clearly visible. When Exodus-3 arrived, the passengers, from the FAITH and Spitz enclaves, would be settling there. I expected life to get very interesting once the FAITH colony got started. I doubted that nineteen years of stasis would improve Minister Cranston’s disposition. The FAITH leader wasn’t what I’d call a people-person to begin with, and his relationship with the Bobs had developed into kind of a hate-hate thing.

I sent another drone up a few hundred meters and set it to circle the area, watching for any movement of native life. Nothing lurked nearby, probably due to the noise of the automatic weapons.

Things appeared to have calmed down, and everyone was back to work. I backed out of the drone and back into my VR. Sighing, I rubbed my forehead. Sometimes I missed sleeping for a third of each day. It had been a nice break from reality.

“Guppy, I have some printer schedule changes.”

Guppy popped in and waited silently for me to continue. Looking at him, I wondered if I should change the Admiral Ackbar image. But nothing else came to mind, and anyway it had become a kind of tradition with the Bobs.

“We need more observation drones.”

[All printer groups are currently engaged in producing parts for the orbiting farms. Do you want to bump this activity?]

“Hmm, not really. Okay, put half the printers on drones, and produce four full squads. Then back to building the farm donuts.”

[Aye]

Guppy went into command fugue while he reprogrammed the 3D printers. I turned back to the video windows from my active drones. I would build more drones as requested, but I had a bad feeling that we’d go through a few colonists before we got the fence completed.

* * *

“Good afternoon, Colonel.” The video window showed Colonel Butterworth, as usual looking impeccable and wrinkle-free. I wondered how he did it.

“Morning, Howard.” He nodded toward my image on his desk phone. “Good to see you. I heard about today’s attack.”

I took a moment to be surprised. I didn’t remember Colonel Butterworth ever greeting Riker with that level of friendliness back on Earth. I wasn’t sure if I should be offended for Riker or pleased for me.

The leader of the USE enclave had been at odds with Riker since day one. I had all Riker’s memories of those days of course, right up to the moment that Riker had cloned me. It would be an understatement to describe Butterworth as “pushy,” although at least he was always professional.

With a mental shrug, I decided not to worry about it. Different time, different place, and let’s face it, I wasn’t Riker.

“Yeah, but we won’t be so lucky next time,” I replied. “The raptors are smart. They’ll figure out that backhoes aren’t edible. If they’ve got good color vision—a high likelihood—they’ll probably associate bright yellow with inedible things with hard shells. Then they’ll start concentrating on the soft and squishy two-legged things.”

Butterworth snorted. “I saw your immediate strategy with the drones. I’m just reading your plan for observation and surveillance systems. Looks comprehensive. I have a few small suggestions, which we can go over when convenient.”

I nodded without comment. The colonel’s suggestions would be good ones, and I’d very likely implement them.

“So, where’s Mr. Brodeur? Wasn’t he supposed to be here?”

“He was.” The colonel shrugged. “Something came up. I’ll debrief him separately, and call you if anything requires more discussion.”

I nodded, then glanced over the colonel’s shoulder, where the townsite plan was posted on the far wall. I motioned at it with my chin. “Kind of old-school, isn’t it? A paper poster tacked up on a wall?”

“Hardcopy still has its place, Howard. It’s much bigger than an image on a tablet, and I can make notes on it with a color marker. Of course, I also take a picture, periodically.” The colonel gave me his trademark dry smile. “In other news, we are ready to decant the farming specialists from stasis. Mr. Brodeur tells me that they will have the farm area enclosed within a week.”

“Good. Bert and Ernie are getting antsy about unloading everyone soon.” Butterworth winced as I mentioned the two colony-ship Bobs. I wasn’t sure which was more amusing—that he disapproved so much over our naming choices, or that he recognized the reference.

“Another month or so, Howard, then we can make that decision with confidence.” The colonel reached forward out of frame. “And maybe by the time Exodus-1 and Exodus-2 get back to Earth for another load, someone will have found another habitable system and they’ll stop shipping people our way.” Without waiting for a response, he ended the call.





3. Life in Camelot

Bob

March 2167

Delta Eridani

Archimedes placed the bone tool with care and tapped it with a rock. A fleck of flint dropped off the core, and Moses nodded in approval. Archimedes repositioned the tool for his next strike, and glanced at Moses with his ears pointed slightly forward. Moses made a small hand motion. Archimedes moved the tool a fraction to the left and his ears curled with concentration as he again tapped on the tool.

The other Deltan adolescent, whom I’d named Richard, watched Archimedes then tried to copy his technique. But the tool slipped off the cobble and stabbed into his foot. He leaped up and hopped on the other foot, cursing with enthusiasm.

After a few moments, Richard noticed Archimedes’ grin and scowled. Snarling, he compared Archimedes to pigoid droppings, then stalked off, limping.

Moses and Archimedes were the tribe’s best flint experts and tool-makers. And based on Richard’s performance, still the only ones. Archimedes was a teenager by Deltan standards—past puberty, but not yet fully grown. He was, however, easily the most intelligent Deltan in the village. Which meant, based on our searches, the most intelligent Deltan on the entire planet of Eden.

Archimedes was the first Deltan in years, it seemed, who could understand Moses’ flint-knapping instructions. A couple of juveniles, like Richard, had shown some interest, but couldn’t maintain the level of concentration required to complete a tool. Very likely Archimedes would have to wait for some of his own progeny before he’d be able to attract any apprentices of his own.

“Moses isn’t looking so good,” Marvin commented, looking over my shoulder.

“Yeah, I know. I think the march from the old village was harder than we expected. A couple of other elderly Deltans have died since they got here.”

I mentioned my theory about potential apprentices, and Marvin laughed. “I can think of at least two females from Archimedes’ cohort who are actively working on that.”

Yeah, gotta love adolescence. Between his flint-knapping skills, his tool-making ability in general, and his position as primary spokesperson for The Bawbe, Archimedes had a level of mojo totally out of keeping with his youth. All of which apparently went over quite well with the girls.



Archimedes set aside the core and the tools, stood up, and stretched. He and Moses exchanged a few words, and Moses got up and wandered off. There was no nine-to-five in Deltan society. Things got done when things got done. It looked like they’d had enough for the moment.

Archimedes turned and looked around until he located the drone I was using to observe. He grinned up at me and made a head motion toward the practice range. I bobbed the drone in agreement, then floated after him as he headed in that direction.

I opened the conversation. “Things are looking good. Everyone seems to have settled in.”

Archimedes nodded. He walked in silence for a few more moments. “Arnold is happy with the new village, uh, Camelot?” I had mentioned my name for the camp once, without running it through the translator. Archimedes was trying to render the word phonetically. It was a valiant attempt, but no human would have recognized the sound.

“Let’s just go with your word for it, Archimedes. My language doesn’t translate well into Deltan.”

“Fine with me. That hurt my throat. Anyway, Arnold likes how we can defend the two access paths instead of the entire boundary.”

Camelot was a located on a small mesa that was surrounded by scree and cliffs most of the way around. It reminded me a little of an aircraft carrier, including a rocky bluff in the center resembling a carrier’s control island. Two paths, about 120 degrees apart, were the only ways on or off the mesa, unless you could fly. It was a huge improvement over their old village, which had been just a clearing in the forest. Guarding against gorilloid attacks had been a full-time job at the old village, and they’d still been losing the battle.

“Two people were killed in the last two hands of days, though, right?” I said.

Archimedes shrugged. “The gorilloids are a problem. They are always hungry. And there are so many on this side of the mountains. Guarding is a bigger job when people are away from the village.”

All the more reason to make it less necessary to leave the village. I already had herding on my list of things to teach them. I still needed to find an appropriate herd animal to domesticate. I turned away from the drone window just long enough to sigh and shake my head. That TODO list just kept growing.

I found myself in one of those all-or-nothing situations. I’d made a decision to help the Deltans avoid extinction. What had started as a small, anonymous intervention quickly turned into a full-time job as The Bawbe, resident sky god. I hoped eventually to be able to leave them to their own fate, but that probably wasn’t in the cards for a generation or so.

We had arrived at the practice range, so I dropped the topic. Practice range was a trumped-up description, of course. The range consisted of a flat area at the side of the steep embankment leading up to the central bluff. Deltans staked up targets on the slope, and they used these to practice the new technology of spear-chucking.

We watched for a few minutes. Most Deltans could get a spear into the right area, point first, most of the time. But actually hitting one of the targets was an accomplishment, and usually resulted in a lot of dancing and taunts directed at the other students. Any thought of precision was an unreachable fantasy for most. Some Deltans were out-and-out terrible, and one or two couldn’t get it through their heads that the spear had to fly point-first. Those individuals generally stayed on pigoid-hunting duty, where the spear never left your hand.

Archimedes was exceptionally good with a spear, but he lacked the upper-body strength to get any kind of distance. When he reached full adulthood, though, he would be formidable.

Arnold was the other prodigy in this new technology. He had an intuitive feel for anything that involved killing. A natural warrior, he’d been the first Deltan to kill a gorilloid with a hand axe, splitting the beast’s skull with one blow. Arnold was almost as big as a juvenile gorilloid, so he generally got very little backtalk.

Arnold paced back and forth, helping individuals with their technique and yelling encouragement. I chuckled, without letting it play out through the drone. I’d rigged the translator to render his speech with an Austrian accent. It never got old.

“How is it going with the medicine woman?” Archimedes asked, interrupting my train of thought.

I cringed inwardly. One of the surprising things about Deltans was their lack of awe for the divine authority of The Bawbe, and Cruella took that philosophy to new heights. A tribe of primitive humans would have been hanging on to my every word, but Deltans were much more skeptical and inclined to question. My first attempt to introduce them to tents still smarted a little.

“Not so well. She either flat out doesn’t believe most of what I say, or she just doesn’t want to change her ways. I am able to get the occasional concession, but it’s an uphill battle.”

Archimedes grinned up at the drone. “Welcome to my tribe. Maybe you should use one of the flying rocks on her.”

I laughed, not only at the comment, but at the fact that Archimedes was sounding so much like me. He’d picked up the concept of dry humor right away, but it was completely beyond any but maybe a half-dozen other Deltans.

And using a buster on the medicine woman was certainly tempting. A self-propelled forty-pound ball of steel impacting at Mach 1 didn’t leave much room for argument. “I’ll take it under advisement. She’s at least taken my suggestions for cleaning wounds. She’s not completely closed-minded, just very conservative.”

Archimedes shrugged. He’d been dealing with that level of conservatism his whole life. It was a constant source of amusement to him that I was surprised by the attitude.

We continued along the path, which led up to the top of the central bluff. It was a flat area, about the size of a small house. Completely exposed to the elements, it would be useless as a living space, but the view was spectacular. On a sunny day like this, many of the adolescent Deltans gathered here to do what teenagers did the universe over—get away from the adults.

We endured a few moments of staring as Archimedes came over the crest, the football-sized drone hovering by his shoulder. But I was old news, and the kids soon went back to what they were doing. They appeared to be playing Rinjhaxa, a sort of pick-up-sticks with betting. Again, I was struck by how very human-like these people were. We only had two data points as of yet, but I wondered if there was some universality about the way intelligent species developed and behaved.

Archimedes waved at Diana, who sat with some of her friends. She smiled and waved back, then glared at the drone and turned away. Not my number one fan, for sure. I’d never given her any reason to hate me, as far as I knew. It might be as simple as competition for Archimedes’ attention.

Archimedes sat down, facing north-east towards the mountain range that split this section of the continent. I brought the drone down to a comfortable talking height and took a moment to enjoy the view.

One of the two moons of Eden hung in the sky, twice the apparent size of Earth’s moon. The sun, low in the west, imparted a golden highlight on the scattered clouds. The forest, stretching horizon to horizon, would have looked completely natural on Earth, before human beings clear-cut the planet.

Archimedes gestured towards the mountains in the distance. Most of them were high enough to have snow year-round. “That’s a big journey. It was hard with you leading us back here, when we knew what we were heading for. It must have been harder when our parents and their parents were going the other way and had no idea what they’d find.”

He looked around at the village, spread below us on the mesa. “It’s so much better here. Except for all the gorilloids, of course.” Archimedes showed his teeth, which I automatically translated to a frown.

“That’s good, Archimedes. I want to see your people succeed. I don’t know if there are a lot of intelligent species in all the worlds of the sky, but each one is priceless. So far, my brothers haven’t found any others.”

“How many Bawbes are there?”

I smiled at the question, but Archimedes couldn’t see that. “I don’t really know. I made four others before I left the last star, but they will hopefully have made more. I’ve made three here, so far. Two have left, and Marvin is still here, helping me.”

“You make brothers?”

“It’s complicated, Archimedes. I’m not flesh and blood, like you. Each brother I make is a copy of me, with my memories and everything. But usually a little different in personality. Marvin is more cautious than me and tends to keep me from implementing wild plans.”

Archimedes stared at the drone for a few more seconds, then looked away. “Questions just bring more questions, and I never catch up. I should stick to things that affect my people.”

I laughed, which the translation routine converted into the Deltan expression of humor. “That’s fine, Archimedes. I have a very similar problem. I call it a TODO list. It only ever seems to get bigger.”

Archimedes grinned in response and turned to the vista spread out before us. He sat and I hovered in silence, enjoying the scenery.





4. Water Planet

Mulder

October 2170

Eta Cassiopeiae

Eta Cassiopeiae was a long-period binary. The brightest of the pair, Eta Cassiopeiae A, was class G3V, only slightly larger and more luminous than Sol. At 19.5 light years from Epsilon Eridani, it was a bit of a hike. But all of the closer good candidates were spoken for. As part of Bill’s third cohort, I had to take potluck, I guess. Most stars are K and M class, and I just didn’t see a tidally locked planet sitting practically inside the chromosphere of its parent star as being a desirable vacation getaway. So, here I was, twenty-odd years later. By now, Homer and Riker would have gotten to Sol, and whatever situation they found would be resolved one way or another.

I chuckled, remembering the early days back at Epsilon Eridani. Homer was a real card. I think he picked his name at least as much because it bugged the other Bobs as anything else. I wondered if Riker would kill Homer himself in a “friendly fire” incident. That made me laugh out loud, and Guppy looked at me with fishy concern.

I lifted Spike off my lap and put her on the desk, then got up and stepped outside into the sun. My VR was a tropical location, with open-air huts, reminiscent of Gilligan’s Island. It would be totally impractical in the real world, of course, but in VR you could do anything.

Guppy followed me out. [Results are in. We have found no Jovians]

“None?” I frowned. “I wonder if that’s good or bad.”

[Insufficient information]

I nodded distractedly, and turned back to face the beach.

I took a minute to enjoy the sun on my face and listen to the surf. I suppose I might eventually get tired of this scene, but not any time soon. It made me regret that I’d never taken the time for this kind of vacation when I was alive.

Taking a deep breath, I stepped past Guppy and back into the hut. The holotank showed the layout of the star system with about 95% confidence at this point. There might be a few smaller bodies floating around that we’d missed, but I doubted they’d be major players.

The companion star, Eta Cassiopeiae B, had a closest approach of 36 AU at periastron, which meant planets were unlikely outside of about 9 AU of EC-A. It also meant that the Oort and Kuiper objects had been disturbed many times. Any planets in this system would have taken more than one good pelting. The good news was there was probably very little left out there to send inward.

“That one,” I pointed to the third planet. “Is right smack in the Comfort Zone. Any indication of size?”

[No. But spectroscopic analysis is showing oxygen and water lines]

“Oh, that’s excellent.”

[There is also indication of a wobble, which would indicate a satellite]

“Better and better. Okay, Guppy, plot a course to planet three.”

[Deploy mining and survey drones?]

“Naw, let’s see if this system is worth hanging around in, first.”

Guppy somehow managed to look disappointed, although if pressed, I couldn’t for the life of me describe what a disappointed fish looked like.

I stared in thought at the image floating in front of me. We’d detected four other rocky planets, two inside and two outside the Comfort Zone, but no Jovian planets. That worried me a little, as Jovians tended to keep the inner system relatively safe by perturbing anything coming straight in from the outer system.

Of more concern was the lack of a significant asteroid belt. The general plan for the HEAVEN project was to use the mineral wealth of asteroid belts to build the space station and future Bobs. No asteroid belt could spell trouble.

Meh. One thing at a time.

It took a few days to get there. I spent that time doing fine scans of the system for any sparse asteroid belts that I might have missed. No such luck. This system really had been swept clean. I had five planets, and whatever moons they might have, to work with. Planetary mining would require a lot of re-think.

I also got a bead on the moons of planet three. There were two bigger ones, one about half the size of Earth’s moon, and one about a fifth the size; and two smaller ones, closer in, really not much more than big rocks. The planet itself was a little smaller than Earth, with a .87 surface gravity and a 26-hour rotation. The atmosphere was delightfully Earth-like, maybe a little more oxygen-rich.

I inserted myself into a polar orbit and started deep scans. The planet had a lot of cloud, just like Earth. That was good, since it indicated robust weather patterns. It also had a lot of water. In fact, so far, all I’d seen was water.

“Have we detected land, yet?”

[Negative]

“Well, that’s… irritating. Alert me as soon as we find something.”

[Aye]

* * *

[Scans are complete]

“But you were supposed to alert me—oh.”

I examined the scans and started to laugh. Honest to God, a good belly laugh still feels good, even in VR.

The planet had water, all right. Oh, did it have water! What didn’t it have? Land. None. Nada. Not so much as an atoll. This was just one big ball of ocean. Not even any freakin’ ice caps to stand on.

Which raised the question of what exactly was creating the oxygen. On Earth, that would be green plants. But plants, not to put too fine a point on it, tended to require dirt. Excuse me, soil.

“Guppy, are you sure about the chlorophyll?”

[Affirmative]

Huh. Weird. I was obviously missing something. This would require a closer look.

I’d gotten a message from Bill with plans for planetary exploration drones while I was still incoming, but with no raw materials to work with, I was pretty much S.O.L.

I sighed theatrically and turned to Guppy, who was standing at parade rest, as usual. “I guess we’d better survey the system. Set a course to take us past each planet. Let’s start with a flyby of this planet’s moons.”

[Aye]

It took a couple of weeks to hit all the other planets and their satellites. While I was buzzing around, I did manage to catalog a couple of asteroids with relatively eccentric orbits. I sat back in my beach chair, with a coffee in my hands, and reviewed the reports. There was lots of metal in this system. It appeared to be a little richer than Sol, in fact. But everything was planetside. It looked like the space junk that normally infests a system had virtually all become an impactor at some point. I could only guess that the effect of the binary partner, combined with the lack of a Jovian, had resulted in some weird chain of events that cleared the system. I’m sure an astrophysicist would have an explanation at the ready, and I promised myself I’d give that a think when I had the time.

I flew out to the fourth planet, the second moon of which had good ore deposits close to the surface. I set up the autofactory in orbit and fed several of my drones and roamers into it to use as construction material. A week later, the autofactory had built a couple of small cargo vessels. I loaded them up with mining drones and sent the whole crew down to the moon’s surface.

While I waited, I re-examined the scans of planet three and pondered. I remembered reading that all of Earth’s water could have been supplied by a single icy comet about 1000 km in diameter. Given the amount of material in Sol’s Oort cloud, that was barely a sneeze. Since this system seemed to have had its cloud cleared, it wouldn’t be too much of a stretch to think that the planets got pounded early on.

While the mining drones slaved away, I pondered the question of whether this world was even worth reporting as a colonization candidate. Oh, it had oxygen, and it had water, but the amount of effort required to build any kind of base would be incredible. I knew from the libraries that Earth in the twenty-second century had started building and populating floating cities, but they operated only with the support of land-bound industries.

Well, not my decision. I would just send in a report and let the powers that be hash it out. If there still were any powers that be, that is. The war could have wiped out humanity entirely, for all I knew, which would make this whole exercise moot.

Still, eventually, Riker would report back to Bill, and Bill would transmit the news in one of his regular blogs. Until I heard different, I was going to continue to play Von Neumann probe. I owed that to Dr. Landers.

* * *

[Construction AMI controller is now online]

“Cool, thanks, Guppy. Order it to start on a couple of Bobs, then the space station.”

[Aye]

The Artificial Machine Intelligence could handle routine construction using standard plans, and would contact me if it ran into any issues that were beyond its programming.

The various construction tasks would take months, so I flew back to the third planet with a couple of exploration drones to look around. I started with a deep scan of the ocean. And got my money’s worth. I had to retune three times before I was able to detect ocean bottom. Eight hundred kilometers deep. That was just nuts. I’d had some thought of artificial islands, but unless there was a Mount Lookitthat down there somewhere, there wasn’t going to be anything close enough to anchor to or build up.

I stared at the result in disbelief, then turned to Guppy. “Start a detailed mapping survey of the ocean floor, using the current SUDDAR settings. Let me know when you have a complete globe.”

[Aye]

Telescopic surveys indicated some kind of green patches on the ocean, so I sent some drones down to investigate. It didn’t take long to discover the source of the atmospheric oxygen. Plants had discovered that by sitting on top of the water, they could get much better light. The plants formed large mats—and by large, I mean literally kilometers in diameter. I dispatched a biology drone to take samples.

The drones couldn’t go underwater. That would just screw up the SURGE drive something fierce. Even atmosphere required careful tuning to avoid futzing up the field. But SUDDAR scans from in close revealed that the underwater ecosystem was rich beyond belief.

“Well, this is looking not so bad, suddenly. Assuming any of this is edible, people could live here and work upstairs.” I looked at Guppy for a reaction. I might as well not have bothered.

The biological drone spent weeks surveying the mats and immediate area. The mats actually seemed to be comprised of multiple species of plant in symbiotic relationships. The animals had found the free ride, and there was a thriving commensal zoological ecosystem in and on the mats.

At the end of two months, I took the completed survey results and reviewed them.

Biocompatible. And according to the report, exceptionally so. In fact, other than a few amino acids and vitamins, it looked like humans could go native on the mats, barring anything poisonous.

I formatted a complete report and handed it off to the space station AMI, to be transmitted to Bill once the station was completed. The autofactory had completed a couple of computer matrices and cradles, so I did a backup and restored it into the matrices. HIC3821-1 and HIC3821-2 came online.

I expanded my VR to make room for company and invited them in.

Two Bobs popped into existence across the desk from me. I offered them beach chairs, and Jeeves brought coffee.

I smiled at them. “I guess you’re wondering why I’ve gathered you here.”

H-1 rolled his eyes. “Funny, I knew you were going to say that.”

That got a chuckle from me. And wasn’t what I’d expected, so my clones were already diverging from me. “So, got ideas for names?”

H-1 piped up, “Skinner for me.”

I made a moue of appreciation. “Keeping to the theme. I’m touched.”

“I’m more of a Jonny Quest type,” H-2 said.

Skinner and I chuckled dutifully.

After a polite pause, I pulled up the system schematic with the autofactory area magnified in a cutaway view. “Okay, you guys are going to be helping out around here until your hulls are ready to go. After that, it’s up to you, of course.”

Both Bobs nodded. Jonny said, “No prob with the helping out, but I’m blowing this podunk system as soon as my vessel is ready.” He turned to Skinner. “It’s up to you whether you want to stay or not. Personally, I’d rather go look for something a little more interesting.”

Well, that was a bit harsh. But, his choice, of course. Skinner simply shrugged.

I pointed to the image of the space station. “The station is almost done. When it sends the report Bill-ward, we set the mining drones to automatic collection, and that really ends our responsibility here. Questions?”

Both Bobs shook their heads.

“I might stay for a while and do another round of Bobs,” I continued. “I’m curious about the life on Three. Hmm, Poseidon would be a good name, I think,”

“Ooh, naming it and everything. You are a sentimental sort.”

Jonny was definitely a sarcastic S.O.B. I decided he couldn’t leave soon enough for my tastes.

Skinner seemed to agree with me, as he was looking askance at Jonny. This seemed like Mario or Milo all over again. I remembered Bob-1 wondering what he’d do if he found he didn’t like any particular clone. Turned out it didn’t matter. It’s a big galaxy.





5. Progress

Howard

December 2188

Omicron2 Eridani

The fence was all but finished, the town had been laid out, and now it had an official name. Landing wasn’t particularly inventive, but everyone thought it was appropriate.

I was on a conference call with Colonel Butterworth and Stéphane, discussing the recent deaths. The colonel had his usual glass of Jameson. Stéphane was calling in from the field, so his image was up in a separate window. Teleconferencing was certainly a lot easier than it had been in Original Bob’s lifetime. And it made things better for me, since in this context, I was as real as anyone else.

“Two dead,” Stéphane repeated, shaking his head. “A couple of raptors hid behind transport trucks hauling logs and simply walked into camp, staying out of sight. The beasts are tricky. Are we sure they aren’t intelligent?”

Colonel Butterworth cocked an eyebrow at him. “By which, I assume you mean human-level sentient. And the answer is no, to the extent we can determine. I’ve discussed this with Dr. Sheehy and her staff, and they assure me that the raptors have no language, beyond stereotyped verbal signaling. They use no weapons, not that they need any, and we see no evidence of structures.” He shrugged. “In the absence of some other form of evidence, they appear to be only animals. Very smart ones, but nothing more.”

“It doesn’t have to be all or nothing, Colonel.”

Butterworth looked at me, one eyebrow still up. “I understand the philosophical point, Howard. However, in the real world, we are here to propagate our species. It is simply not possible to do that with a zero footprint. I would be happy to stop killing raptors, if the raptors could be persuaded to stop trying to eat colonists.” He smiled. “Failing that, we and they will continue to interact in the ways that competing species have always handled such situations.”

Stéphane nodded and grinned at me. “And that is where we come in.”

I knew there was no good answer to this discussion, and there were other things at the top of my mind. “On another subject, are we on schedule to decant the rest of the colonists?”

“As long as the second farm donut is ready to go into full production, yes.” Butterworth took a sip of his whiskey and stared at it thoughtfully. “I’m going to have to start rationing this more stringently. The next barrel is sixteen light-years away. If any still exist at all.” He shook off the thought and looked at me.

I ignored the comment about the Jameson. “We’re on schedule, Colonel. Bert and Ernie are anxious to get going back to Earth for another load.” And in thirty-five years or so, another twenty thousand people would have to find a place to settle on either Vulcan or Romulus. Would I still be here? Or would I have handed it off to one of my clones by then?

Stéphane said, “Security is ready. The fence will be finished within forty-eight hours. Your observation drones are helping greatly.”

I nodded to him. “It’s kind of ad hoc, right now. Eventually I’ll want to put together a really good, automated system.” I turned back to the colonel. “Farms are ready, and I’m building up a surplus in anticipation of need.”

“And we have adequate shelter, although many will live in barracks for another month or two.” Colonel Butterworth looked at each of us in turn. “I think we’re ready. Please pass the word to the Exodus pilots.”

I grinned. Finally. Opening Day.

* * *

I accepted a ping from Bert, and he popped into my VR. I saw that he was no longer wearing the Battlestar Galactica uniform. Well, the joke had been wearing a bit thin.

“Hey, Howard. I just got your email. Butterworth has agreed to offload the balance of the colonists?”

I noted Bert’s obvious excitement. I guess it was a question of pride; Bert and Ernie wanted to be on the road, hauling colonists. Orbiting Vulcan, acting as floating warehouses, just didn’t cut it.

Bert sat and accepted a coffee from Jeeves. “It looks like Exodus-3 will be here mid-next-year.”

“Yep. Riker told Sam to take it a bit slow on the flight, to give us more lead time. We agreed to get the Spits off-Earth within six months of the first two ships. Nothing was said about arrival times.”

“Ah, lawyering. Makes the universe go ‘round.”

I smiled, then grew serious. “We’ve needed the extra time. Milo wasn’t kidding about Vulcan’s ecosystem. They’ve had to go back and reinforce the fence, then add electrical wiring to dissuade the brontos from chewing on it. And to keep out the raptors, and the giant snake-things, and those burrowing armadillo things…” I shook my head. “We’re making progress, but it’s like wading through molasses sometimes.”

“Well, not really my problem.” Bert took a sip of coffee. “Shuttles start moving people down this afternoon. Just make sure you have somewhere to put them. I’m about ready to just hover over the tarmac and turn the shuttle sideways to dump ‘em out.” He grinned to show he wasn’t serious. Or at least not completely so.

“Okay, Bert, I’ll let the colonel know.”

He finished his coffee, disappeared the cup, and popped out with a wave.





6. Contacting Bill

Mulder

April 2171

Poseidon

Subspace Communications Universal Transceiver. Kind of forced, but we had a tradition, going back to FAITH, of bad acronyms. The radio transmission from Bill contained a complete set of plans and operating instructions.

So, I built the SCUT from Bill’s transmitted plans, and now I was ready for the magic moment.

I just hoped it wouldn’t blow up.

I flipped the switch, and the console immediately started scrolling information.

Sol

Epsilon Eridani

Alpha Centauri

Omicron2 Eridani

I followed the menu prompts and registered myself on the network, then selected Epsilon Eridani and pressed connect. The transmitting icon came on, and I began to speak. “Hi, Bill, this is Mulder out at Eta Cassiopeiae. I’ve found—”

Bill popped into my VR. “Hi, Mulder. How’s tricks?”

“Holy—” I was speechless. It was just under twenty light-years from here to Epsilon Eridani, yet this was Bill, sitting across from me in my VR.

Bill laughed. “It never gets old. Welcome to BobNet. Instantaneous communications across interstellar space.” He waggled his eyebrows at me in our standard Groucho Marx impersonation and took a sip of his coffee.

I nodded slowly in appreciation. “And is that your standard entrance?”

“Oh, hell, yes. And I’m keeping track. Notches on the holster and all.” We both laughed, and I materialized a coffee of my own. This was huge. Real-time communications changed everything. No more decades-long turnaround times for communications.

“So, anything interesting here?” Bill waved his coffee in a vague out there gesture.

“I think so. We have a colonization target. It’s not ideal, but I don’t know if you’re in a position to be picky. Or if we even need colonization targets. Did Riker find anything?” I pushed a file towards him. Bill went into frame-jack for a moment while he absorbed the contents. When his avatar unfroze, he looked pleased.

“Not bad. I see your point, though. Colonists would have to establish a space presence immediately. Still, to answer the question: No, we’re not in a position to be picky right now. And yes, Riker found something. Check out his blog on BobNet.”

We spent several more seconds getting caught up, and I promised to read all the blogs. Bill gave me a wave and popped out.

Well, that was interesting. It appeared I should put some effort into preparing this system. The standard plan was to have a supply of refined metals available in orbit when the colonists arrived. And I’d have to write a bestiary, with detailed information. Some of the creatures in-planet were truly impressive by any definition. The kraken, especially, needed an entire chapter of its own.

Time to buckle down and get serious.





7. Back to Work

Riker

July 2171

Sol

I looked at my list of TODOs for the day and sighed. I was a little surprised at how much I was missing my family. Julia and Clan Bob were all aboard Exodus-3, in stasis, heading for Omicron2 Eridani. There would be no contact until they arrived at their destination and were revived. I tried to remind myself that it was an eye-blink at my life scale, but any way I looked at it, I would still have to experience every day of those seventeen years. Twenty-four-hour days, since I didn’t sleep, experienced in millisecond intervals.

This train of thought seemed destined to send me into a deep funk. With an effort of will, I brought myself to task.

The first item, as always, was a status check on colony ship construction. I checked the summary window rather than doing a personal inspection. Unless some significant step was due, I didn’t need to micro-manage.

At that moment, Charles popped into my VR. “Hey, Riker.” One of the first clones I’d made here in the solar system, Charles was still hanging around and helping out. He knew the politics of Earth almost as well as I, and the location of everything in the rest of the system far better. If he ever decided to leave, it would be crippling.

“Charles. What’s up?”

“I wanted to update you on the sabotage.”

“So what’s the scoop?”

“Um, it looks like we’ve got two different groups working. VEHEMENT is definitely behind the attacks on infrastructure. They’ve left the usual calling cards afterwards. Everything is designed to target food production. They’re very tech-savvy and obviously know what they’re doing.”

VEHEMENT appeared to be some kind of radical environmental group, whose ultimate goal was to save the world by removing humanity. And they weren’t picky about ethical questions when it came to their methods.

Charles popped up a couple of images, and samples of the VEHEMENT statements. He waited for me to review them before continuing. Some were the typical pompous ravings of self-important people—all pronouncements and assertions, written with nose firmly in the air. Others were acerbic and even ironic. This latest fell into the latter category:



A friendly reminder that you are a scourge on the universe. Do it a favor and disappear.

This public service message brought to you by:

Voluntary Extinction of Human Existence Means Earth’s Natural Transformation



Charles continued when he saw he had my attention. “The attacks on Florianópolis don’t fit the profile, though. There’s no announcement afterwards, and the attacks seem aimed at maximizing fatalities rather than damaging infrastructure. They’re not sophisticated, either, mostly just brute-force explosives. I think those are just attacks on Brazil, or what’s left of it. There’s still a lot of resentment against them for the war.”

I nodded thoughtfully. This confirmed my private opinion. “That also means the second group might not be a single organization. It could be multiple groups or even independent individual actions.”

“Agreed. For all that more people are dying in those acts, it’s less of a long-term issue and can be handled by local law enforcement. The VEHEMENT stuff worries me a lot more.”

“Mmm-hmm. They haven’t gotten at any of our space-based assets, but considering the technological expertise they’ve already displayed, I wouldn’t be surprised if they figured out a way.” I had my mouth open to describe the steps I was taking to track them down, but then hesitated. I wasn’t entirely sure why—I couldn’t realistically suspect Charles of anything—but I got a sudden feeling that I should play this close to the vest. VEHEMENT was good. Maybe they could decrypt communications between Bobs.

I had implemented full scanning of all communications in the solar system. A half-dozen AMIs monitored all communications, watching for key words or patterns. It was a scattershot tactic, but I really had no other options. There was no reason to inform the other Bobs. I wanted them to act natural, anyway.

Charles interrupted my train of thought. “How’s the construction going?”

“Oh, uh, I was just checking that. Generally still on track. I’m going to check with Homer, next, about food production.”

Charles nodded. “Okay, let me know if you need any help in that area.”

I gave Charles a nod, and he saluted and popped out.

Next on the list was food production. I sent Homer a quick text about the space-based production facilities, and he reported that the wheels of industry were turning smoothly. I smiled at his response. I’d taken to calling him General Bullmoose, and rather than take offense, he thought it was hilarious. Typical Homer.

My smile disappeared as I pored over the attached spreadsheet. Food production Earthside continued to drop as the climate deteriorated. The pounding that the planet had taken during the war was sending Earth into an ice age. As the glaciers advanced and snow accumulated farther and farther from the poles, arable land became tundra, then tundra became ice. We had to balance food production with moving higher-latitude enclaves into more equatorial locations. Homer’s space-based farms were taking a lot of the pressure off. As each farm donut was spun up and began producing crops, we were able to move Estimated Time of Habitable Earth Remaining later by a couple of years. The farm donuts were Homer’s idea, and he ran them like a military operation.

However, the thirty thousand people we’d managed to get off-planet so far were barely a drop in the bucket. Fifteen million human beings were all that was left of Homo sapiens, but it was still a lot of bodies to move. Fifteen hundred ships or fifteen hundred trips.

I put down the document, and took a moment to massage my forehead. The UN session had started a few minutes ago, and I needed to be there. Highlight of my day, for sure. Not.

Since the departure of the USE and Spits enclaves in the first two ships, I didn’t really have anyone I talked with regularly. All the other enclaves maintained a very arms-length relationship, except for a few like New Zealand who were actively antagonistic. Between that and my relatives being in stasis, I felt very isolated these days.

Well, at least today’s session would be interesting. We’d just gotten word about Poseidon from Mulder at Eta Cassiopeiae. The biology was compatible, and the floating mats were more than adequate to live on, at least in the short term. Longer-term, the system had enough resources to support construction of floating cities. Several of the smaller island nation enclaves had expressed an interest.

The problem was one of priority. Exodus-4 and -5 were almost finished. Would we send one to Poseidon, or send both to Omicron2 Eridani?

The member from the Maldives was speaking. Representative Sharma was campaigning hard on behalf of the tropical island nations. Common wisdom held that they should be last out, since their climate was still the most moderate.

“Yes, as the representative from Vancouver Island has pointed out repeatedly, the Maldives and other equatorial nations still have moderate climates. What the representative has failed to do is explain why that matters. If we emigrate, our lands become available for those in extreme hardship. Either way, the hardship cases are ameliorated.”

She motioned to the image of Poseidon. “The important question is whether we settle a second system, or whether we continue to pour all of our emigrants into Omicron2 Eridani. We are better off now, as a species, than we were a few years ago. We are spread through two star systems. But three systems would be better, and four even more so. All other things being equal, let us at least go for three. The challenge to the member from Vancouver Island, and to other objectors, is to show specifically why things are not equal, and not by using faulty associations.”

Representative Sharma stuck out her chin defiantly, held the pose for just the right beat, then released the audio, giving up the floor.

I wanted to clap, but that would be unseemly. I really had no particular skin in the game on this issue, but I agreed about distributing humanity as widely as possible. The species had just finished almost wiping itself out in a single system. You’d think people would grow a brain.

I looked at the board. More than half of the Request-To-Speak indicators were lit up. I sighed, disconnected from my public avatar for a moment, massaged my forehead again, and wondered for the thousandth time how I’d let myself get roped into this duty.

I hoped today they’d call for a vote.





8. Farming Satellites

Howard

April 2189

Vulcan

The holotank glowed with overlapping information windows, all competing for attention. Several nodes blinked red, demanding immediate input. I cranked up my framerate a little. Not enough to overload the VR hardware, just enough to be able to get ahead of all the demands on my attention.

“Guppy, you’ve got coordination of the drone mule-team, right?”

[Affirmative]

Good thing. I thought my head was about to explode.

We were about to spin up the third farm donut, which would increase our capacity just in time for the arrival of the third colony ship.

Farm-1 and Farm-2 were already in full operation, generating a comfortable .25 G in the rim. Riker and Homer had found through trial and error that crops didn’t do well below that level of gravity.

Specialized drones maintained the farm sections, which were producing all the kudzu you could eat. Yum. Of course, I didn’t have to eat it, what with being a computer and all, but the humans were not so lucky. Until the colonies were to the point of being self-sustaining, everyone’s daily calorie intake was up to fifty percent kudzu. And because of kudzu’s digestive side-effects, meals and other social gatherings tended to be outside. Or involve open windows.

One of the status windows dinged. Guppy was starting the spin-up of Farm-3. After a lot of debate filled with discussion of gyroscopes, compressed-air propulsion, and traditional JATO units, Homer had settled on a very old-school system for spinning up the orbital farms, which we were still using. We tethered four drones to the rim with cables, ninety degrees apart, and had them fly in circles until we achieved the proper RPM. Primitive, but effective.

I watched the status displays as Farm-3 came up to speed. No issues. And more importantly, no sabotage. It seemed that VEHEMENT was either still completely confined to the Sol system, or they hadn’t acquired any assets here. But we didn’t know how many members might have gone out with the various colony ships. We would have to be vigilant until humanity was well-enough established to survive its own craziness.

I shook my head. Enough daydreaming. I ran final checks on Farm-3, then directed Guppy to start planting operations. Farm-3 would grow regular crops. Vegetables, wheat, berries, stuff people actually wanted to eat. I really needed to get this right or there would be talk of lynching.

* * *

“Coming up on beacon. Fifty klicks and closing.” Sam’s image floated beside the system schematic. Exodus-3 was on track to merge neatly with the L4 point shared by the twin planets, Vulcan and Romulus. The Vulcan colony had declared a holiday, as it was unlikely anyone would be getting anything done anyway. I was transmitting my displays down to the Landing City network, which was broadcasting out to every TV in town.

Exodus-3 slid up beside the communication beacon without as much as a wobble. Sam ran through his shutdown checklist and changed status to station-keeping.

With the formalities out of the way, I popped over to his VR.

“Welcome, Howard. Pull up a chair.” Sam waved a coffee mug in the general direction of a Victorian wingback.

I looked around his VR. It had the feel of an old English drawing room, the kind of place Sherlock Holmes might have hung out. Sam was drinking a coffee, but a quick inspection of the menu showed that I could order from a broad selection of drinks.

I decided to see how well Sam had simulated cognac. I indicated my choice to Jeeves, and sat down.

“I’ve started to decant the setup crews,” Sam said. “I looked over the maps and resource summaries that you provided. Pretty thorough.” He grimaced for a fraction of a millisecond. “No doubt Cranston will still find something to complain about.”

I accepted the glass of cognac from Jeeves and took a moment to taste it. Not bad. Quite good, really. Sam had obviously spent some time getting it right. I set a TODO to ask him for the template.

I put the glass down and leaned forward. “Your colonists will really need to tread lightly on Romulus. Milo was right—there was a recent extinction event, and the ecosystem is still very shallow. No large-scale clearing, and especially don’t let any Terran biota get loose. Make sure both colony groups understand that.”

Sam nodded, eyes focused on infinity. With an obvious effort, he turned his attention back to me. “You’re really lucky, Howard, getting to see the colonies in the early stages like this. A lot more exciting than driving a bus. I’ll be leaving in a month or two, to go pick up another load.”

“Sure, Sam, but I keep a blog. And lots of videos of anything that’s even remotely interesting. Yeah, it’s not real-time, but the universe is our playground, now, y’know?”

He grinned in response. We spent a few seconds getting caught up on gossip, then moved on to the serious business of setting up a colony of ten thousand people on an alien world. Just another day at the office.

* * *

Only two days after the first FAITH and Spits personnel were decanted, and everyone was already at war. Or maybe back at war was more accurate. The three-way battle between the USE, FAITH, and the Spitsbergen enclave for berths in the first colony ships had been a major pain in the ass for Riker back at Earth. It appeared that not much had changed, and now I’d inherited the problem.

You couldn’t actually come to blows in a videoconference, of course, but the blustering and yelling more than made up for the lack of bloodshed. I put my head in my hand and shook it slowly back and forth.

It took a few seconds for everyone to notice, then the yelling petered out.

“Tell you what,” I said, “How does pistols at dawn sound? Three ways. That should be interesting.”

President Valter looked slightly sheepish, Minister Cranston indignant, and Colonel Butterworth amused. But at least they’d shut it. The three colony leaders settled themselves behind their desks and waited for me to continue.

“I understand a certain amount of competitiveness,” I said, looking at each person’s image in turn. “But isolationism will just get you dead. And I sure as hell will not buttress any such attitude with extra support.”

Cranston’s face turned red. “You are not in charge, replicant. We will make our own decisions about what’s best for us. What makes you think you have the right to dictate? Or for that matter, the moral high ground?”

I tilted my head and smiled innocently at the leader of the FAITH colony. “Hmm, I’m trying to remember now. Of all of us here, everyone who didn’t participate in a war that virtually destroyed the human race, please raise your hand.” I raised a hand, and waited a moment to see if anyone else would have the gall to do so. “I’m a neutral party here, Mr. Cranston. Yeah, even with jerks who treat me as a piece of equipment instead of addressing me by name. But I’m also a volunteer. I’ll help who I want, and I’ll leave if I want. As a good leader, you should take that datum into account when deciding how much of an idiot you want to be.”

I glared at the three video windows. No one responded.

After a moment of awkward silence, Valter said, “Very well, we will trade some of our decanted livestock. If necessary, for future considerations. Howard, I am hoping you will act as adjudicator in such cases.”

“Absolutely, Mr. Valter. And thank you. Colonel, some breeding stock now will help you until we’ve finished force-growing the animals in the artificial wombs.” I turned to Cranston. “Minister, your repayment should consist of setting up and running a large batch of artificial wombs to take the pressure off the Spits. The both of you can pay them back with interest once your own stock is high enough.”

I looked around at the various windows. No one commented. With a sigh, I checked my agenda for the next discussion item.

* * *

“You show a lot more patience than Riker ever did.” Colonel Butterworth raised a glass of Jameson toward me.

“Thanks, Colonel. I think. We Bobs are definitely different as individuals. I wonder why they never picked up on that back on Earth, when they were working on the whole replicant thing.”

Butterworth shrugged. Science-y stuff like that didn’t interest him, except to the extent it affected his job.

He poked at a pile of paper on his desk. “This native vine that I mentioned before is turning into a significant problem. The level of invasiveness puts anything from Earth to shame, except possibly bamboo. If we don’t get ahead of it, we might end up expending all our energy just beating it back.”

“Hmm, the native ecosystem has the home court advantage, unfortunately. Doesn’t it serve as food for any native species?”

“As far as my scientists can tell, it contains a toxin of some kind that the native browsers find disagreeable. Even the brontos won’t eat it, and they are the un-pickiest herbivores I’ve ever seen.”

I laughed. The brontos would eat almost anything that provided net calories. They would eat all the leaves from a tree, then the twigs, then the bark from the main trunk and branches. What they left behind looked very sad. Fortunately, Vulcan trees could survive having their bark stripped.

The brontos had even started munching on the fence, when they could get close enough. A couple of strings of electrified wire had nipped that habit before it could catch on.

“How does it affect people?”

Butterworth shook his head. “The vine is not edible as such. However, the toxin doesn’t seem particularly effective against Terran biology. As soon as we have some livestock, we’ll see if they’ll eat it.”

I nodded silently. Colonizing an alien planet, as with everything else, was more complicated than TV and movies let on. Clearing the land and building houses was just the beginning. We had neither the resources nor the desire to commit planetary ecological genocide, and doing so would doom the colony anyway. But learning to live here was going to be a case of mutual accommodation.

Fortunately, so far no alien diseases had found humans compatible. I wasn’t really surprised. Even Terran viruses were generally specialized for a specific species or lifestyle. Eventually something would make the jump, but by then we would hopefully be ready for it.

The colonel brought up a few more minor items, then we signed off. So far so good, but my movie-conditioned mind was still waiting for the inevitable disaster.





9. Something is Out There

Bob

September 2169

Delta Eridani

Marvin popped in and started to speak several times, without success. I couldn’t identify the expression on his face, but it reminded me of a fish that had just eaten a lemon. Something was definitely up.

I’d been going over the autofactory schedule with Guppy. I turned back to him. “It doesn’t look like there are any surprises. Make the changes I’ve listed, and let me know if anything goes off-schedule.”

[Aye]. Guppy blinked huge fish eyes once and disappeared.

Marvin was still doing a pretty good imitation of a fish himself. I grinned at him. “Come on, Marv, spit it out. You know you wanna…”

He took a deep breath. “Something, and by ‘something’ I mean damned if I know what, hunted the Deltans almost to extinction at their original location.”

“Uh, say what?”

“I found a number of disarticulated Deltan remains. In different places, so it wasn’t just a one-time thing. The damage was not indicative of gorilloids. We’ve seen their work. They’re lazy. They strip the meat, not even thoroughly, then go back for a new victim. Whatever this was, it did the full workup. And chew marks on the bones indicate something much bigger than a gorilloid.”

I sat back and rubbed my chin in thought for a moment. “So there’s another apex predator out there. Great. I may have to break out the exploration drones and put them on a kilometer-by-kilometer survey.”

“I think that would be a good idea, buddy. And if we have the printer cycles to spare, maybe print up a few more sets of drones.”

“Of course. Because screwing with the autofactory schedule is never a problem.” I stood up, stretched, and wandered to the end of the library, gazing at nothing. After a moment’s thought, I pulled up the files from my initial exploration of Delta Eridani 4. I knew that my survey had been less than thorough. But I wasn’t a professional exobiologist, assuming such a job had ever even existed. And once I’d found the Deltans, everything else had taken a back seat.

I replaced the library bookshelves with a blank wall and spread the images of the fauna I’d catalogued across its length. Pacing along the collage of images, I tried to imagine any of them able to take out a full-grown Deltan.

Marvin materialized a La-Z-Boy and settled in with a coffee. Spike immediately assumed an invitation and hopped up to settle in his lap.

The collage offered no inspiration. The leopard analogues and the gorilloids were really the only animals I’d encountered that would prey on Deltans, and they just didn’t fill the bill.

I waved a hand and killed the collage. In frustration, I cancelled the room VR and activated my Deltan village VR. Marvin jerked in surprise, and Spike leaped up and fled. I felt a moment’s guilt for not warning him.

Marvin gave me the Spock eyebrow, and I answered with an apologetic grimace, then turned and started walking through the village. The recording was incredibly detailed, but still just a recording—no interaction was possible. I wished for the millionth time that I could interact with the Deltans through something a little more immediate than a floating mechanical football.

Finally, I turned back to Marvin, who had refused to give up his La-Z-Boy. He was reclining, drinking a coffee, right in the middle of a group of Deltans who were skinning a pigoid. I laughed and he grinned back.

“Okay, Marvin. Let’s get going on that search. Guppy?”

Guppy popped into existence. [You rang?]

Cute. I suspected that Marvin was feeding lines to Guppy just to bug me. “Printer schedule change, Guppy. Print up four more complete squads of exploration drones. Looks like we’re going snipe hunting.”

Guppy’s huge fish eyes blinked. [This will result in another delay to the armaments project. I remind you that you have assigned that project high priority]

“That’s fine. I think we’re ahead of the curve with the gorilloids. Attempted attacks are down to almost zero. We’ve got enough spare busters to bash their heads if they try any kind of large-scale attack.”

Guppy nodded and disappeared.

Marvin stood up and waved the chair away. “I’ll get started on the full survey as soon as they’re ready. Meanwhile, I’ll map out some search strategies.”

We gave each other a wave and he disappeared. I closed the village VR and brought back my library.





10. Genocide

Mario

November 2176

Zeta Tucanae

It took seven years plus change to get from Beta Hydri to Zeta Tucanae, although less than three years ship’s time. I spent almost the entire voyage going over the records from Beta Hydri 4. I didn’t want to believe that someone could have done that. I wanted so much for it to be a natural disaster of some kind.

But the evidence was, if not conclusive, at least pretty damned convincing. Someone had killed off an entire planet and collected all the bodies—literally all the animal life on the planet—then mined all the metals from the entire system. My mind kept playing all the movies where aliens came in and tried to strip the Earth. This was worse. They killed everything, and they left nothing. But how? And why?

I sighed and dismissed the theorizing for perhaps the thousandth time. I couldn’t know without more information. But I wasn’t going to wait. I needed to report this to Bill. The Bobs needed to be warned.

I couldn’t know in advance if Zeta Tucanae would be stripped of metal as well. If so, I would just skip to the next system, and keep doing so until I either found a good star system in which to build a space station or had traveled back close enough to simply transmit a message to Bill with shipboard comms.

I did the usual cautious approach into the star system, watching for Medeiros, aliens, other probes… it would be funny if I wasn’t so nervous.

I didn’t actually know if there were more Medeiros clones out in the galaxy, but since Brazil’s plan had been to keep producing them, it seemed a reasonable concern. Bob had prevailed against him in Epsilon Eridani, but that had been as much luck as anything.

It took a week or so to determine the system layout. The star was a little more luminous than Sol and a bit bigger, but slightly less massive. The metallicity of the system was lower, but not so low as to make things difficult for me—as long as the Others hadn’t already cleaned it out.

I found a single asteroid belt and several inner rocky planets. Actually, this system was similar enough to Earth’s to make me a little homesick. I headed for the asteroid belt, while I continued to scan for any activity.

I went about halfway around the belt before giving up. The Others had already cleaned up here as well. I decided I would get a quick look at the single planet in the habitable zone, then continue on to the next system on my list.

What I found was the worst possible outcome.

Exploring the planet through various drone cameras, I could see that something had caused massive destruction. Based on the ruined structures, entire cities had been taken apart. Concrete pylons indicated where bridges might once have spanned rivers. Huge washouts indicated where dams had been disassembled without regard for the downriver effects. And junk littered what looked like roadways, where presumably the contents of some kind of vehicles had simply been discarded when the metal and the passengers were collected.

“Guppy, I need a full scan of the planet. Set up the drones to do polar orbits, and get the whole surface.”

Guppy nodded without comment and went into command fugue. I sensed the blips as more drones launched. I settled back to wait.

* * *

If I’d been still living, I would have thrown up. As it was, I couldn’t watch for long.

The destruction was total, the devastation worldwide. These, whatever they were, these Others had callously killed billions of sentient beings the way a construction crew would clear the ground before starting to build. And I could think of only one reason for collecting the dead bodies.

When we met them, it would be war.





11. Mating Dance

Bob

November 2169

Delta Eridani

The Deltans were coming into their breeding season, and the tension in Camelot was climbing. In the past, stressors like the gorilloid threat had kept things low-key. It’s hard to get amorous when you’re looking over your shoulder every few seconds. But this year the Deltans were top dogs in their environment. The gorilloids had finally figured out the new pecking order. There hadn’t been an attack in almost a month.

A lot of that was due to the busters. Any gorilloid coming within a certain distance of Camelot was met head-on by a forty-pound ball of steel. The encounter was fatal to both, but I could produce more busters faster than the gorilloids could produce more gorilloids. The Deltans rarely even looked up any more at the occasional sonic boom.

I knew more or less what to expect from previous years. Male Deltans vied for the attentions of the females in any of a number of ways. Wrestling matches, mock battles, tests of skill, even good old fashioned bluff and bluster. It was great fun to watch, and generally no one got badly hurt.

This year, though, Archimedes had introduced a new test of skill: spear-chucking. And you couldn’t refuse a challenge. But that wasn’t working out entirely in Archimedes’ favor. The other young males had figured out that they should avoid that particular contest with him, so they were challenging Archimedes first, based on contests of strength. Unfortunately, Archimedes was rather bookish, as Deltans went. I wondered if nerd-dom was a universal thing.

After Archimedes got dropped on his head in a couple of encounters, I decided to teach him some basic jujitsu. It turned out to be harder than expected, because the Deltan skeletal system didn’t always bend the same way as a human’s would. We had to improvise a few locks and throws based on their different physiology.

But the principles were still applicable, and Archimedes was motivated. We narrowed it down to the five or so most useful moves. He spent a day going through the steps in pantomime, establishing the muscle-memory, before he rejoined the circus.

Almost immediately, a couple of young toughs tried to push him around to establish dominance. His response was slow and tentative, but it was a completely new concept and his opponents didn’t even recognize the danger until they were on their butts looking up at him. After that, Archimedes strutted around the village like he owned the place.

Marvin laughed, watching all the antics. “I’m sure there’s some element of vengeance in there. Getting back at all the childhood bullies by proxy, perchance?”

“Y’know, Marvin, this habit of yours of analyzing my motives is a real pain in the ass. Especially since they were your childhood tormenters, too.”

Marvin grinned and waggled his eyebrows. Sadly, he was probably right about my motivation. I was doing what I could to make sure Archimedes did better at the metaphorical mating dance than I had as a teenager. And the more descendants Archimedes created, the sooner the entire tribe would be at or near his level of intelligence. Win-win, as far as I was concerned.

“Now if you could only change Archimedes’ mind,” Marvin observed.

“Yeah, I know.” Having kicked butt yet again, Archimedes was making the moves on Diana. She had to be a knock-out in Deltan terms, because I couldn’t figure out what else he could see in her. She intensely disliked the drones and wouldn’t hang around anywhere near us when I was with Archimedes. An obvious symptom of low intelligence, in my books.

* * *

Marvin popped in without warning. “Things just got creepier.”

I looked up from the observation window. The mating season was almost done. Most pairings had been decided by this point, but some Deltans hadn’t gotten the memo. You could tell when that happened, because the miscreant would find himself (and sometimes herself) being beaten on by both members of the pairing on which he or she was trying to intrude. That was usually enough to make the point, but there were three or four individuals left who couldn’t seem to take get lost for an answer. Archimedes and Diana had formalized their mating without further challenge, so it was purely scientific interest on my part.

I glared at Marvin, ready with a sarcastic comment about the interruption, but I changed my mind when I saw his face. He looked distinctly freaked out, and Marvin tended to be level-headed. I set the video window to record and minimized it. “Okay, Marv, what’s up?”

With a flick of a finger, Marvin popped up an image in midair, showing an ancient set of bones. By this point, we were both experienced enough with all things Deltan to recognize parts of a Deltan skeleton. And this one had the bite and claw marks that I’d seen on some of Marvin’s other specimens.

“Looks like another victim of the mystery predator. What’s special about this one?”

“I found it less than a mile from Camelot.”

“Oh, son of a bitch.” If the range of this thing included the immediate area, and it was still around, I may have brought the Deltans back to be the main course. I remembered some comments that had been made when the Deltans first arrived at Camelot. In particular, one of the elders hadn’t been happy with the explanation that it was the gorilloids that had driven the Deltans out. Unfortunately, he’d only had vague memories to support his feeling.

I grabbed a drone and went looking for Moses or Archimedes. I found Archimedes first, fortunately not with Diana, and explained the situation to him.

“That’s not good,” he said. “If we were safer at the old site, and you brought us back here…”

“Yeah, I know, Archimedes. Don’t rub it in. On the plus side, we may have some lead time to prepare. But I need to find the elder who was making those comments.”

“Moses would know, I think.”

We found Moses with very little effort. He’d found and laid claim to a favorite lounging spot on the south side of the bluff, where he spent his afternoons sitting in the sun, relieving the pain of his stiff joints. I allowed myself a moment of sadness. Moses seemed to have entered that long slide into failing health that was all too common in the elderly. I went through the story again.

“It does sound familiar,” he said, thoughtfully. “That was Axler, I think.” The translation routine was programmed to render Deltan names in human-pronounceable sounds. It would tag that particular translation for permanent association with the name. “Sadly, he died three or four hands ago. I don’t think anyone else is even close to that old.”

“Wonderful,” I said. “Archimedes, Moses, don’t say anything to anyone else about this. I don’t want to start a panic without more information. Marvin and I will do some more investigations. I will also set some drones to a wide perimeter guard. If anyone sees them and asks, just tell them I’m doing a gorilloid count.”

The two nodded, both looking worried.

* * *

“But where have they gone?” Marvin scratched his head, staring at the globe.

“Look, maybe Deltans weren’t their primary prey. Maybe they discovered that Deltans were delicious and started hunting them preferentially. After the Deltans left, they would have just gone back to whatever they normally hunted.”

“Right, which is why I’ve expanded the search. But let’s face it, we’re talking about millions of square miles. A predator can have quite a range.” As he talked, Marvin was dividing the land area on the continent into segments. I could see from the metadata that he was assigning drones to each segment.

He sat back and stared at the results. After a few moments of consideration, he handed it off to Guppy for implementation and turned to face me.

“How are we for busters?”

I raised my eyebrows in alarm. “Damn. Good point. I haven’t been keeping up with production. Between the gorilloids all growing a collective brain, and us taking the printers off-schedule to build the extra exploration drones, we’re down to less than a dozen.”

Marvin grinned. “Welp. There goes the schedule again, I guess.”





12. Bob Calling

Bill

May 2171

Epsilon Eridani

[Incoming SCUT connection. New node]

Guppy made the announcement with the same fishy poker face that he would use to announce the end of the world. I looked up and grinned. Garfield dropped the file he was working on and came running over. Only a handful of Bobs, so far, had received the SCUT plans that I’d been broadcasting and had built their own FTL transceiver. Each new connection was an event.

I held the moment as long as I could. Just as Garfield drew a breath to yell at me, I said to Guppy, “Play the incoming.”

“This is Bob calling. Bill, you actually cracked FTL communications? I’m impressed!”

I did a fist pump, and then Garfield and I whooped and performed a high five—the nerd kind, where you miss.

Logically, Bob-1 was no more significant than any other Bob that received the SCUT plans, but this wasn’t a matter of logic. Bob-1 was like Odin the All-Father. He started the whole thing. For me it was special, since he’d cloned me. For any of the third-generation or later Bobs, it would be like legend walking among us.

Of course, that wouldn’t stop me from pulling the usual prank.

I popped into Bob’s VR without warning, coffee in hand. I noticed, as the VRs synced, that he’d been doing some enhancements of his own. The versions weren’t incompatible, but there would be video glitches. I’d have to upgrade him to my latest release so he would be fully compatible with BobNet.

“Holy—” Bob jerked in surprise, and Spike bolted from the desk she’d been sitting on.

I laughed. “Works every time. Hi Bob. Welcome to BobNet.”

Bob smiled at the implied tip of the hat. I took a millisecond to look around his VR. This appeared to be a planetary environment—a village of some kind. Some species of natives were going about their business. They were obviously intelligent, since they had spears and axes and stuff. They looked a little like walking bats with a dash of pig thrown in, by way of long snouts with flat nostrils. Their fur was short, generally gray, with brown overtones. Kind of ugly, really.

The level of detail was impressive, and I couldn’t remember any movie or book that featured creatures like this. I looked over at Bob, who was trying to suppress a smug grin—and failing badly.

With a jolt, I realized that this had to be real. Or at least a VR based on reality. This was First Contact.

Keeping my expression neutral, I turned in a circle to take in the full tableau. “Who are the neighbors?”

Bob, now grinning unabashedly, swept a hand around the virtual campground. “This is a recording of the Deltans’ village. I use this to experience their environment. Get a better feel for how they live.”

“Interesting. Have you made contact?”

There was a barking laugh from off to the side, and I looked over to see another Bob. I turned back to Bob-1 and was surprised to see he was blushing. That was better VR realism than my version supported. I decided I’d do a merge on the VR features before upgrading him.

“Bill, this is Marvin.” Bob gestured toward the newcomer. “He’s a disrespectful pain in the ass. And that’s one of his better qualities.”

Marvin and I smiled and nodded to each other. I said, “I recognize the tone of that laugh. I guess Bob has gone overboard.”

Marvin smirked. “You might say that. He’s become the great volcano god. Did you see the spears and axes?”

“Hey!” Bob interjected. “I resent that. I’m more of a sky god.”

We all laughed together. Despite the joking, though, I was still a little lightheaded. An intelligent species, the first we’d ever run across. I had a pretty good idea which blog was going to be number one on BobNet for the next little while.

Bob motioned me to a couch and coffee-table setup sitting incongruously in the middle of the native village. “So, Bill, what’s new in the galaxy?”

I sat down, accepted a coffee from Jeeves, and took a moment to pat Bob’s incarnation of Spike, who had come back to investigate. The cat’s A.I. appeared more independent than my version. Another item to merge. It dawned on me that Bob was still the reigning master of VR coding.

“Wow, what’s been happening?” I thought for a moment. “Well, Milo discovered two habitable planets at Omicron2 Eridani. Named them Vulcan and Romulus.”

Bob laughed. “Of course he did. What else could he do?”

I grinned back at him, then got serious. “Riker and his clone, Homer, had a big battle in Sol with the last of the Brazilian space navy, and discovered that humanity had almost wiped itself out in a system-wide war. They’re building colony ships and are hoping to get some people to Vulcan before the Earth stops being livable.”

Bob interrupted. “How many people left?”

“About fifteen million, give or take.”

“And how big are the colony ships?”

I nodded, understanding where Bob was going. “Ten thousand capacity. Yeah, I know. Fifteen hundred ships or fifteen hundred trips. But we can only do what we can do.”

Bob nodded. He looked worried, and I couldn’t blame him. Riker and I had this conversation regularly. So far, we hadn’t found any shortcut.

I tried to change the subject to lighten the mood. “We’ve got a minimum of about twenty Bobs running around the galaxy right now, by my estimate.” I waved a hand in casual dismissal. “You know. The usual. Blah, blah…”

Bob visibly shook off the funk and tried to smile. “Sounds like you’ve taken to the job of central clearing house with a vengeance. Got anything going in Epsilon Eridani besides the SCUT?”

“I’m slowly terraforming Ragnarök. Riker has sent some seeds and plant samples my way with an outgoing Bob. They should be here in three years or so. Then I’ll try to get some basic moss/lichen hybrids growing. Oh, and the Android project. I’ve got a quadruped android working, more or less, and I can control it remotely. It’s slow going though, and I’ve barely scratched the surface.”

“I’ll want one of those when they’re available,” Bob said. “I’d like to be able to go down to Eden as an actual presence instead of a floating camera.”

“Mmm.” I nodded. It looked like Bob was pretty invested in the lives of the Deltans. No real surprise, though.





13. Investigating the Others

Mario

May 2180

Gliese 54

This time, I was lucky. Unlike Beta Hydri and Zeta Tucanae, Gliese 54 was untouched.

I had no clue about what might determine the course of whatever beings had stripped the two other systems. If they travelled as a single unit, and they were travelling in a straight line, they might never meet up with any of us. My concern was that, if they were mining that much metal, they were probably building something. The obvious answer to that would be more of them. And that would be bad.

This was not a particularly interesting system. The primary was a small K, almost a red dwarf. It had a single lonely planet orbiting in close, and a bunch of space junk. Of course, space junk was what I needed. Although the overall metallicity of the system was low, most of it hadn’t aggregated into planets.

The manufacturing process was routine, even if I only had memories of having done it once as Bob-1 in Epsilon Eridani. It took a couple of months to build and deploy the space station. Once it was up, I squirted every bit of information I had on the Others back to Bill. The station had the added bonus that I would be able to transmit to it from any of the stars in the immediate area, and it would relay my messages to Epsilon Eridani.

I also decided that I didn’t want to be alone, so I started construction of four more Bobs. Bashful, Dopey, Sleepy, and Hungry all agreed to accompany me to deal with the potential threat. Yes, they named themselves after dwarves. And yes, it was pointed out at some length that there was no Hungry in the original crew. Hungry didn’t care. Apparently I can be very perverse. And stubborn. Anyway, there’s that joke about the fifty dwarves…

We sat around the desk in my treehouse, sipping tropical drinks with little umbrellas. Except Hungry, who refused to go along with the theme. He had a coffee. I suggested we rename him Surly and received a middle finger for my trouble.

Sleepy opened the discussion. “We have to figure out the vector and size of the invasion, or infestation, or whatever it is. Is it heading for Earth? Or away?”

“And what they’re doing with all that metal. If they’re building more ships, it must be a massive fleet. How would we not see them coming?” Dopey looked around at us, palms up. “And all the, uh, food…”

“Yeah…” I nodded slowly. “We have no information, really. We have to find them. And we have to get a report back without becoming part of their harvest. Their ants are surprisingly efficient. I’ve learned several things from them, which I’ve already squirted back Bill-ward.”

There was silence around the table as everyone digested this.

“So we each pick a system outward and head there,” Sleepy said. “We should keep a transmission channel open at all times, so we’ll have a record if one of us disappears.”

“Yes.” I nodded. “The open line should run all the way back to Bill. If necessary, stop and build a relay station. Keep up a constant stream of commentary and observations and send regular differential backups. Just in case…”

Sleepy took a sip of his drink before responding. “Sounds like a plan. Although I don’t like the implications. If I get taken down, the Bob that gets restored won’t really be me.”

“What, you’re positing a soul, now? For us?” Surly, I mean Hungry, rolled his eyes. “Every time the crew of Star Trek transported, they faced the same philosophical question.”

Sleepy rolled his eyes back at Hungry in exaggerated mockery. “Again with the fictional TV series. Is that where you get all your life lessons?”

Hungry frowned. “Well, you should know, shouldn’t you?”

“Children, children. Am I going to have to separate you?” I glared around the table. “Can we focus on the planet-destroying, rampaging alien whatzits for now?”

Sleepy and Hungry both looked embarrassed. After a moment of silence, I continued. “I would also suggest that we have some kind of self-destruct capability built in. Maybe a dead-man trigger. Personally, I don’t want to have to feel myself being slowly disassembled if I get caught, and I certainly don’t want it or them to learn anything from me.”

“Wow, this is getting morbid. I don’t feel quite so negative about the backups, now.”

I chuckled. “So let’s pick our destination systems, put together a working comms link, and get this show on the road.”





14. Sabotage

Riker

December 2170

Sol

The image on the video made me curl my lip in a sneer of both contempt and disgust. Half a herd of cattle lay dead in their paddock—fifty animals, poisoned by something in the food, according to the vet. On the other video window, Ms. Sharma, UN representative for the Maldives, waited silently. She was attempting to maintain a stone face, and failing.

The slaughter represented the third act of full-blown terrorism this month. VEHEMENT was ramping up from a nuisance to a full-blown threat. This was the first time they’d taken lives, though, even if livestock. I hadn’t come out and said it, but I considered this an act of war. If I caught up with this group, and it came down to an exchange of ordnance, I wouldn’t have any ethical issues with taking some of them down. I admitted to myself that I really didn’t know if I’d be able to pull the trigger. It was one thing to talk war, it was another entirely to actually take a human life.

But I would want to. That much, I was sure of.

Food supply continued to become more critical as Earth’s climate deteriorated. Over half of the thirty-five remaining enclaves around the planet were at least partly dependent on food subsidies from our orbital farms. The Maldives were still nominally self-supporting, but this assault on their food capacity would mean we’d have to kick in, at least in the short term.

Representative Sharma finally couldn’t hold it in any longer. “This is senseless. Senseless! Cattle? What have they proven? What have they accomplished? Cowards!”

I nodded at every word. For all the bickering in the UN, the various representatives were united in their hatred and contempt for VEHEMENT. After an event like this, I could probably push through any special measure I wanted to, with little debate or opposition.

Too bad I didn’t have anything in my queue.

“This is going to hurt, Ms. Sharma. Those cattle represent a lot of high-quality calories, not to mention the breeding capacity.” I took a moment to check the herd numbers. “It’s not life-threatening, but it is damaging. I think, if the handlers hadn’t noticed the animals getting sick, we could have lost this entire herd. And that would have been devastating.”

“I will move to set up a task force at the UN meeting tomorrow,” Ms. Sharma said. “I think there’s been a general feeling up to now that if we just ignored them and didn’t give them the attention they obviously crave, that they’d go away. No longer.”

I nodded without comment. I had the pronouncement from VEHEMENT up in another video window. These people were several screws short, but there was no doubt they were deadly serious. The essential message was that humanity had made a mess of the solar system, and it was time for them to bow out and let the universe recover. And because we might be reluctant to go along, VEHEMENT was going to help us towards that goal.

Great. Violent, self-absorbed crackpots. On top of everything else.

I forwarded the missive to Homer, Charles, and Ralph, and also sent a copy on to Bill. Not that he would have any specific ideas, but I’d gotten in the habit of looping him in on everything. I smiled briefly at the thought. Universal Archives.

Homer popped in a few milliseconds later. “Number Two, I am forced to admit I’m coming up blank. These clowns trump anything I could possibly say, just by existing.”

“Yup. Just when you think humanity has found the limits of stupid, they go and ratchet up the standard by another notch.” I shook my head. “We’re going to have to modify our schedules to replace the calories that the cattle would have supplied. Got any ideas?”

Homer bobbed his head back and forth. “Could be. It’s just possible that I’ve been under-reporting production a bit, to establish a small surplus. I suppose now would be a good time to notice the error with a gasp of relief.” He grinned at me, and I smiled back. Homer was full of surprises.

That was fine for right now. But what about next time VEHEMENT struck? I had a bad feeling that it was going to get worse, rather than better.





15. A Visit From Bill

Mario

November 2180

Gliese 54

I stared in frank amazement at the header on this latest communication from Bill.

Plans for a Subspace Communications Universal Transceiver (SCUT) with zero latency.

Holy. Crap. On a cracker.

Well, the big guy had delivered. I examined the plans and attached notes. Bill was candid that this was an early version, and probably cantankerous. He also wasn’t sure about the range. Yeah, yeah, disclaimer, disclaimer. A hundred-plus years after our death and we still felt the need to lawyer at ourselves. Hmm, and keeping up the FAITH tradition of bad acronyms, too.

Simple math said other stars had received the plans already. I didn’t know if any of them had Bobs crewing the stations rather than AMIs. That would have been a decision made by the Bobs involved at the time. But there was a good chance I’d be able to get a line all the way back to Bill. The specs indicated that the system took care of discovery, routing, and encryption. Cool!

I was lucky to have been still in the system when I intercepted the radio transmission. Bill was obviously beaming the plans to all stars within some arbitrary radius of Epsilon Eridani, but if I’d been between stars, it probably would have missed me entirely.

With no further ado, I suspended all other projects and turned every printer and roamer I had to the task of building myself a, er, SCUT.

* * *

It wasn’t visually impressive. Kind of kludge-looking, really, almost steampunk. I held my virtual breath and flipped the switch. Within moments, connection confirmations began to flood onto the console.



Tau Ceti

Omicron2 Eridani

Sol

Epsilon Eridani

Epsilon Indi

Alpha Centauri

Delta Eridani

Pi(3) Orionis

Eta Cassiopeiae A

Kappa Ceti



I checked the console menus and found that I could register myself on the global directory, which would get me on email, IM, and chat.

Very nice.

I set up my account, then pinged Bill.

“Bill here.”

“Wow. That is truly amazing stuff. Bill, this is Mario at GL 54. I have—”

“Really? Mario?” And with that, Bill appeared in my VR, sitting on the other side of my desk.

“Holy—”

Bill raised a coffee cup at me in greeting. “Dude! Long time!”

“Yeah, well, that’s what I get for aiming for the far reaches.” I gave him a quick smirk, then turned serious. “So, the light-speed report won’t reach you for a couple of decades yet, but we seem to have a problem out here. Here’s the relevant data.” I shoved a set of files over to him.

Bill’s avatar froze for a few milliseconds as he went into frame-jack and scanned the files. When he came back, his eyes were haunted.

“Entire planets… an entire intelligent species…”

“Yeah, buddy. We thought Medeiros was our biggest problem. On this scale, he doesn’t even tweak the needle.”

Bill looked down at his coffee for a bit. I understood the feeling of shock, so I let him work through it uninterrupted.

Finally, he looked up. “This has immediate ramifications. We’ve got humans out here to worry about too.” At the expression of surprise on my face, he waved a hand dismissively. “Stuff’s been happening. Read my current-affairs blog when you get a chance.”

Bill put his coffee down on the desk, and I was momentarily bemused by how well the VR was meshing over a 23-light-year distance.

“This is not the way I envisioned a First Contact situation,” I mused. “I sure hope this isn’t the norm in the universe. Although it would explain the Fermi Paradox.”

“Second.” Bill flashed a wan smile. “Bob beat you to first place by a couple of years. His is more of the good kind, though. Like I said, read the blog.”

He visibly shook himself. “I’ve been running a lot of projects here. The SCUT is just the most dramatic. I’ll pull a few other files and send them your way—stuff you can use for making weapons.”

I nodded. “Anything that’ll help. I don’t get the impression that busters are going to be enough against someone who can zap a whole planet.”

“Yeah, I’ll bump up the priority on anything that looks like it can be weaponized.” He picked up his cup. “And I’ll push this info out to every Bob in the directory. You’d be amazed what can come out when all the Bobs get together to brainstorm. You guys are on your own, though, physically. Even if we assembled a flotilla, it wouldn’t get there for a couple of decades.”

“I’ve already started. I built four to begin with— Bashful, Dopey, Sleepy, and Hungry, believe it or not.”

Bill threw his head back and laughed. “So, uh, Dopey? Really?”

“One of them suggested a name of one of the dwarves, then it became kind of a thing. Before they could grow some collective sense, they’d all taken dwarf names.”

Bill chuckled and pinched the bridge of his nose. “Hungry? So, fifty dwarves?”

I laughed in response. “Ah, yep. Half a century later, we’re all still working from the same material.”

* * *

I’d been working on another cohort of Bobs. This was certainly worth a small delay to modify the plans to add FTL communications, and to upgrade them to version-3. I didn’t expect any reports back from the first cohort for another decade. If I could send the new Bobs in the same directions, they’d intercept the return messages in four years or so and forward them to me via SCUT.

Once again, I scrapped my schedule.





16. Hunted

Howard

September 2189

Vulcan

The buster struck the raptor at just shy of Mach one, spreading fragments of carnivore over the hunting party, other raptors, and most of the nearby vegetation. The red cast that it added to the greenery lent an eerie, dangerous aura to the scene.

Not that a dozen hungry raptors needed help looking dangerous.

This was the third hunting party this week to run into a raptor ambush, and I was glad I’d decided to bring a couple of busters along. The raptors were getting bolder since they’d been successful in taking down a couple of settlers. The Landing City planning committee was still smarting over that—it was their decision to reprioritize guard details that had led directly to the deaths.

The spectacular death of one of their number caused the raptor hunting pride to hesitate, just long enough for the humans to regroup and open up on them. The raptors were tough, but they hadn’t evolved to withstand a twenty-second-century assault rifle.

Within seconds, the raptors were down. The hunters bent over, panting, more from nervous reaction than exertion. My observation drone hovered nearby, keeping watch.

The group leader, Stéphane, looked up at my drone. “Eh, thanks there, big guy. They come out of nowhere, those bastards.”

I bobbed the drone once by way of acknowledgement. The raptors had set up an ambush for the hunters and almost pulled it off. They were intelligent—there were still ongoing arguments about how intelligent. The original three-person hunting parties were now double the size. And everyone involved took the duty very seriously.

“No prob, Stéphane. A little buster billiards now and then is great fun.”

Stéphane laughed, and the group organized themselves back into a proper skirmish line. We had another kilometer of perimeter to cover before we could head back. I silently ordered down another buster from orbit, and assigned a mining drone to come pick up the remains of the one I’d just expended.

Bob’s personnel busters were a versatile tool for wildlife control. I still wasn’t sure if it was more economical than rigging up an armed drone, though. I resolved to discuss Bob’s plastics-backed shells, if I ever had five free seconds to rub together.

Security was turning out to be a much bigger deal than we’d initially planned for. This planet’s ecosystem was incredibly rich, diverse, and competitive. Even many of the plant eaters had weaponry that would give an earth predator pause. In that particular, it was very much like the popular vision of the dinosaur era.

We’d gotten the hint in the first week on Vulcan, when a pride of raptors had paced through the new townsite like they owned the place. Without so much as a please-and-thanks, they’d tried to eat one of the AMI backhoes.

I grinned at the memory. The backhoe wasn’t harmed, other than needing a new paint job. But it suddenly occurred to the planning committee that they weren’t in charge. At least not yet. Hunting and guarding details had been beefed up forthwith, and we’d mostly managed to keep people and raptors separate. Mostly.

And speaking of which, I had a job to do. I sent the drone up to a thousand meters to get a thorough scan. The colony spread below me, looking a lot like twenty-first-century suburbia—except for the very large fence around most of the perimeter. The fence was backed with sonic stunners, to handle the more unruly wildlife, and the trees had been cleared back an additional half kilometer. A small herd of brontos munched on leaves at the edge of the treeline. Like the raptors, they only generally resembled Apatosauri, and they were only half the size of their namesakes. The colonists had gotten on a dinosaur kick when naming the local fauna, even though some of the associations were a bit of a stretch.

I did a quick overflight of the cleared perimeter. Nothing big enough to matter revealed itself. Satisfied, I turned back towards Landing.

The larger buildings at the center of the town comprised the administrative hub, while the airport and two manufacturing centers formed a triangle around it. People and goods moved around in communally-owned AMI-driven vehicles, available in all sizes from commuter cars to buses. The colonists had decided to build their new life on Vulcan with some social changes, starting with the abolition of private vehicles.

Only three months after landing, the city looked and felt established and stable. I was truly impressed at how quickly everything had gone up. Of course, the USE staff had had literally decades to refine their plans while they were stuck in the enclave after the war. No surprise that they’d worked out a lot of the bugs.

I finished my aerial sweep. It looked like the raptors were done for the day. I called Stéphane. “Hey, chief. All clear. There’s nothing anywhere near the fence now.”

Stéphane grinned into the phone. “Bon! I guess the fence crew will have to come up with something new. They keep thinking they are finished…”

We both laughed. The Fence Construction group was taking a lot of flak lately.

“So, Howard,” Stéphane continued after a moment. “We will be going to the Groggery after our shift, to sample the latest attempt at beer. Care to tag along?”

“I might just meet you there, Stéphane. I have a meeting with the colonel first. I do love watching you guys fall over dead, though.”

Stéphane grinned at me. “Eh, the last batch did remind me a little of actual beer. I think they’ll have it right, soon.”

I nodded and promised to be there.

* * *

“Afternoon, Howard.”

“Colonel.” I noted that the colonel had his bottle of Jameson out again. Not that I disapproved, but there couldn’t be much of the stuff left, and the supplier was sixteen light-years away. And no longer in existence, but who’s counting. I said, in an aside to Guppy that wouldn’t show on the colonel’s video feed, “I have a TODO to build a distillery, right?”

[Affirmative. And set to a high priority]

Well, all work and no booze… I chuckled, and merged back into my public avatar.

The colonel had been talking during this sidebar. I frame-jacked momentarily and played back the video to get caught up.

“No deaths for the last three days on the patrols. I hope we’ve gotten ahead of this issue with the raptors.”

I put my hands behind my head and stretched while I considered that statement. The raptors weren’t really dinosaurs. They weren’t really anything Earth-equivalent. They were bipedal hunters, slightly larger than the velociraptors in the first Jurassic Park movie. They had large mouths full of teeth more reminiscent of a shark’s than the peg-shaped teeth of the canonical carnosaur. The raptors—and the USE settlers—had discovered that biocompatibility was a two-way street. Judging by the subsequent increase in raptor incursions, humans had proven to be a tasty treat.

“I wouldn’t want to get complacent, Colonel. These are intelligent animals. They won’t just keep marching into weapon range like a horde of zombies.”

“Yes.” The colonel waved a hand in a dismissive gesture. “Which is why I like the aerial surveillance system that you are implementing. Thermal imagers at night. And take out any that approach within a minimum radius.”

“Well, I doubt that the committee will give you any grief about that decision now.”

The colonel snorted, nodded to me, and ended the connection.

Colonel Butterworth and I got along much better than he and Riker ever did. Whether that was a difference in personality, or just the fact that the colonel was less stressed, was anyone’s guess.

I sighed and scrubbed my hand across my chin. It was time to get back to work.

I took a moment to check the status on the Artificial Womb construction. We were going to be force-growing a generation of farm animals, just in time for the completion of the secure ranching area. If raptors liked human, they’d love cow. Best be prepared.

Everything seemed to be in order, so I called up a session with Bob and Bill. It took a few milliseconds for the connection, and then they both popped into my VR, sitting around the campfire.

“Hey, Howard,” Bob greeted me with a smile. “Always love the camping theme.”

I smiled back, handed both of them sticks, and laid out the marshmallows and wieners. I’d put a lot of effort into getting the campground just right. Evenings around the campfire had been one of the highlights of my summers when my dad would take us out to the cabin. Even as a child, I had felt the spirituality and timeless Zen of sitting around the fire with the trees looming in the semi-darkness.

This fire had just enough poplar in it to cause the occasional pop, but not so much that it began to sound like gunfire. I’d edited out insects—we Bobs tend to be a little obsessive about realistic detail, but come on, who needs mosquitos?

Once everyone was properly set up and ruining perfectly good marshmallows, I started the meeting. “One of our hunting parties ran into a dozen raptors today. They’d set up an ambush, and a pretty good one. I had to busterize one of them or we’d be down another settler.”

Bill shrugged. “I’ve said it before—I know it looks like really intelligent behavior, but pack predators on Earth did that kind of thing all the time. It’s easily explained by instinct. Get Jurassic Park out of your mind.”

Bob was grinning at me, so I just smiled and nodded. “Yeah, okay, point taken. Anyway, Bob’s automated surveillance system should be pretty valuable, once we get it set up. Especially with Bob’s new and improved ordnance.”

“Guppy ran the surveillance system on Eden for years,” Bob said. “It’ll be interesting to wire up a dedicated GUPPI to handle the job, though. No replicant oversight. You sure about that, Howard?”

“Not entirely,” I admitted. “But I wouldn’t dare suggest using up resources to build Bobs just for running guard details, you know?”

Bill and Bob said in perfect unison, “Butterworth would have a cow.”

We all broke up in laughter. With certain notable exceptions, the Bobs all had similar senses of humor. What tickled one funny bone tickled all.

There were a few milliseconds of contemplative silence. I looked at Bob. “How’s it going with the Deltans?”

Bob smiled a sad smile and shrugged. “Archimedes has a growing family, now. Time marches on. People age, you know? It’s starting to freak me out a little. I’m watching people I know live their lives, getting older…”

Bill and I both nodded. Immortality had sounded like a great idea back on Earth, but there were costs, especially when you became attached to ephemerals. I glanced quickly at Bill as I had that thought. I knew Bill was touchy about the use of that term. But no, he couldn’t read my mind. I hoped I didn’t have a guilty expression.

Probably a good time to change the subject. “We’re ahead of schedule overall. We’ll probably be finished decanting the settlers from Exodus-3 this week. Riker will be happy to get back in touch with our relatives.”

Bill and Bob both nodded. Bob said, “I enjoy watching the exchanges, but I have to admit that it would be too painful for me to talk to them. I’m glad Riker is up for it. I keep seeing the resemblance to my sisters in people’s faces, and it’s gut-wrenching.”

I smiled slightly. I don’t think anyone had ever come out and said it to him, but the common feeling was that Bob-1 had gotten an extra dose of Original Bob’s anxiety. He tended to get wound up about stuff like that.

I said to Bill, “Before I forget, I need to contact Riker. I want to find out if he can locate some oak and scan it for me.”

“Oak?” Bill raised an eyebrow at me.

“If Riker can get a good enough scan, I should be able to print some real oak barrels.”

“It’ll take forever to print something biological, you know.”

“I know, Bill. It’s more a proof of concept at this stage. I’ll have a printer doing nothing but making staves until I have enough.”

Bill looked confused for a moment, then grinned. “Going into business?”

“No, just doing my part to maintain morale.”

We talked for a few more milliseconds about miscellaneous items, then they signed off. And Guppy popped in with my next TODO.

Oh. That one. I’d been putting that off…

* * *

Butterworth was livid. This was no mere cow he was having, this was the whole herd. I listened, jaw agape, as he carpet-bombed his tirade with expletives. I hadn’t even been aware he knew the f-word. Turned out he was an expert in its use as a verb, noun, adjective, adverb, article, and several forms of punctuation. I made sure I was recording.

Finally, he calmed down. Relatively. Sort of.

“So these, these… Others—moronic name, by the way—are going around depopulating planets? Just because?”

“Well, according to Mario...” I noted that Butterworth couldn’t quite suppress an eye-roll. He didn’t think much of our naming choices. “…they kill all the life on any planets in the system, then extract all the metals and rare elements.”

“And we’re parked out here like a juicy target!”

I looked down and took the time to rein in my tendency to sarcasm before answering. “Colonel, it’s not like you’d have been any safer on Earth. If anything, Vulcan is slightly farther away from where they appear to be operating. And Earth has been advertising its presence for a couple of centuries with radio pollution.”

The colonel nodded, closed his eyes, and took a deep breath. I felt for him. He had no doubt thought that the worst was over with the landing on Vulcan. Now we were all back in the frying pan.

“So what plans do the Bobs have, Howard?”

Now I was on more neutral ground. “Mario has built a bunch of scout-Bobs, and they’re checking nearby systems. He’s going to keep building cohorts, and they’re going to keep spreading out until they’ve mapped the Others’ depredations. Then we’ll take it from there. Bill has turned his attention to methods of destruction. Unfortunately, the Others are probably ahead of us technologically. We have some bootstrapping to do.”

“Keep me informed, please.” He wandered over and sat at his desk, rubbing his forehead. I enjoyed the few seconds of silence as he reviewed his notes.

“Farm donuts.” He said, looking up at me. “Those appear to be exceeding expectations.”

“Yes, Colonel. Bill came up with a lot of engineering improvements while breeding up the plant stock for release on Ragnarök. He has something called free time. I hope to experience it someday.”

Butterworth snorted and gave me a wry smile. We were both going full-bore, getting the colony up and running. The fact that replicants didn’t need to eat or sleep just meant that I was available seven days a week, twenty-two hours and thirteen minutes a day. Or thirty-one forty-nine, on Romulus. Scheduling was going to be a headache once the Romulan colony was up and running. Funny, I couldn’t remember any science-fiction stories that actually dealt with how you’d handle timekeeping on a new planet.

“And that means,” Butterworth continued, “that we’ll be able to set up the Spits and FAITH colonies on an accelerated schedule. I expect you’re looking forward to your descendants coming out of stasis.”

“No one more than Riker.” I grinned. “I have to admit it’s been a pretty popular program in BobNet.”

Butterworth grimaced. “BobNet. Seven billion people on Earth in the early twenty-first century, and FAITH decided to replicate a nerd-slash-engineer with a Star Trek fixation.” He grinned at me to take the sting out of the comment and reached for the disconnect button. “Until tomorrow, then…”





17. We’ve Lost a Drone

Bob

May 2171

Delta Eridani

The conversation with Bill had been both awesome and depressing. The idea that humanity was down to fifteen million people was devastating. On the other hand, it sounded like that number had come close to dropping to a big fat zero.

On the plus side, I wasn’t surprised that he’d cracked the subspace problem, but I was impressed by how quickly he’d done it. It left a small, nagging question in the back of my mind as to whether I could have pulled that off. How different from me was Bill?

Meh. No matter. The problem had been solved, Bill and I were working on merging the VR source from our two independent development branches, and real-time communications between Bobs was now a reality, at least in principle. I grinned to myself at the idea of a galactic internet. There still weren’t a lot of Bobs online, but that would change as Bill’s message spread through the local sphere at the speed of light.

I was overjoyed to find out that I had the official First Contact position sewn up. But I doubted I would be the only one.

Luke and Bender hadn’t come online yet. I hoped they would eventually intercept Bill’s transmissions so we could get caught up. Just in case, I instructed the local space station to periodically retransmit the SCUT plans along their flight paths. One way or another, they’d eventually receive the plans.

The lack of significant progress on Bill’s Android project was a little disappointing. A lot of the basic tech was being developed back on Earth when Original Bob was still alive. But it was proving difficult to put all the concepts together into an artificial body that could operate like a complete organism. Oh, well. Sooner or later, Bill would make some breakthroughs. Meanwhile, I had my own projects.

Marvin had taken delivery of the exploration squads and was deploying them into his search grid covering the Deltans’ original territory. At the level of detail we were trying for, he expected to be finished in three months or so.

* * *

“I just lost a drone.” Marvin popped into my VR unannounced. He had a perplexed expression on his face.

“Define lost.”

“Have a look.” He popped up a video window. It showed a panoramic view of Eden from several hundred meters in the air. The drone was flying a search pattern, looking for clearings that could be potential former villages. Suddenly, the image began corkscrewing wildly and breaking up. After about half a second of this, the image disappeared.

“The hell,” I muttered. “I’m assuming that was an attack from above?”

“It would appear so. I did a frame-by-frame, and this was the best I could come up with.” He popped up a still image. It was out of focus and broken up by video interference lines, but there was an impression of something biting or chewing on the drone.

“I ran some filters and cleanup routines on it. The result is partly extrapolated.” He switched to a second image. This one was still grainy and lacking in detail, but I could make out what appeared to be a large beak or muzzle, filled with teeth.

“Wow,” I said. “I would sure hate for that to be the last thing I saw.”

“Guppy, are we getting any telemetry at all from the drone?” Marvin asked.

[Negative. Attack likely took out the power system]

“Hmm, well, I want to take a look at the wreckage. I’ll set up a SUDDAR search. Highly refined metal should stand out like a lamp in a cave.” Marvin stood up, gave me a salute, and disappeared.

* * *

The wreckage of the drone rotated slowly in the holotank. Marvin had found the destroyed unit several kilometers south of its last known location and had taken a full-detail SUDDAR scan.

The drone was bitten almost in half, and had two parallel claw marks dug into the shell. The units were designed to be lightweight—unlike the busters, there was no armor. Still, anything that could dent metal like that had to be dangerous. And whatever it was, it was airborne. Scary.

“Then there’s this.” Marvin popped up a couple of images. One was a closeup of the damage to the drone, and the other was a close-up of some bones.

“Interesting…” I reached out and pointed to a spot on the picture. “That looks a lot like the bite impression on the drone.”

“Yeah, I’ve got a number of similar examples. Whatever this is, it used to snack on Deltans.”

“Could that be why the Deltans migrated out of their original area?” My eyes got wide at the thought. “They weren’t moving to a more dangerous territory. The gorilloids were the lesser evil.”

“Or they didn’t know, or care, about the gorilloids.” Marvin’s voice was hushed.

“Then the gorilloids chased them over the mountain range to the location where we found them.”

We sat in silence for several milliseconds.

Marvin finally broke the silence. “I still don’t have enough information to narrow the search.”

“Well, we know they’re big enough to eat a Deltan.”

“Or pull a drone out of the sky.”

I did not like this. Not a bit.





18. It’s Getting Worse

Riker

Sept 2172

Sol

A crowd stood outside the police lines. Hopeless faces, some crying; parents holding children by the hand, couples holding each other, wearing stricken looks. People who would be better off almost anywhere but here.

Sixty-three confirmed dead, so far. The apartment building, a run-down six-floor concrete structure with no balconies, now had a huge bite taken out of it at ground level. That it would have to be condemned was a given. I was more worried that it might fall over any moment, crushing everything nearby.

This wasn’t a great neighborhood. By almost any pre-war standards, it would be a slum. Buildings all had their own power systems since the invention of dependable fusion, but the streets were dirty, unlit, and covered with graffiti. Windows and doors at ground level had long since been reinforced or completely covered over. Stains ran down the sides of the structures from weather, deteriorating paint, and contributions from birds.

The people living in this favela hadn’t been significant in any way. They weren’t government, or military, or anything that would justify making them a target. Just people, probably unemployed, living on the edge of poverty. Most of them likely had no hope, no future, other than the possibility of eventual emigration to another star system.

What was the point? What could possibly justify this? The perpetrators had attacked people with next to nothing, and taken even that. Sometimes it shamed me to think that I used to be human.

I accepted a call from the Brazilian minister.

“This is the third attack this month, Riker. And there has been no progress in catching the perpetrators. What assurances can you give me that something will be done?” Minister Benedito looked more spooked than angry. Very probably he was worried about his job. Still, this wasn’t the time to get my back up.

“Minister, I’m not in charge of the investigation. Really, I’m not in charge of anything except the global emigration effort. I’m here as, well, a consultant. I will help out the investigation any way I can. But you have to look to your internal security forces to get this resolved. Plus whatever the UN can do, of course.” I could see from Benedito’s face that he didn’t think much of my response. But it was all I had.

I made mining drones available to the emergency personnel, to help locate and extract bodies or survivors. I set up surveillance drones around the perimeter, in case the terrorists tried to send in a follow-up attack. And I made sure that those in charge had a direct line to me. And mostly, I waited.

This was, as the minister had said, the third attack this month. This was terrorism, pure and simple. And not even for any political end, as far as I could tell. There had been no announcements, no demands. Someone simply seemed to be out to get Brazil. Since Florianópolis was pretty much all that was left of the former empire, this was the natural target.

Fifteen hundred ships, or fifteen hundred trips. The inexorable logic of mathematics mocked me.

* * *

Minister Gerrold, the representative from New Zealand, was holding forth again on my shortcomings, both real and imagined. He really hated me, for some reason, and had since day one. Not that I cared—the man was a putz—but my orderly mind liked to have a link between cause and effect. Plus, if I was going to create this kind of reaction in someone, I would rather have an end-game. Fighting some random idiot was a waste of energy.

Today’s rant was about the sabotage and our inability to deal with it. I let my public avatar display alert interest, while I rolled my eyes in my VR.

He finally ran down, and I prepared to offer a response, but the minister from the Maldives beat me to it. And beating a computer to the punch was an impressive feat. I wondered if I should do a systems check.

The chair recognized Minister Sharma and she stood up. “I’d like to thank the minister for giving us a summary of his speech from last session. Which, if I recall, was also a summary from a previous speech. I’d be even more appreciative if it had been a prelude to some new information. Or at least witty. Minister Gerrold, you’ve obviously got a problem with the replicants. I’d like to ask you to take it offline, so we can get on with actual business.”

The attention lights blinked rapidly, the remote meeting’s equivalent of applause. Minister Gerrold’s face clouded up and he sat back, arms crossed.

I made a note to send Sharma a thank-you note. But she was right. He obviously had a pickle up his butt about replicants in general, and me in particular.

The next item on the agenda concerned the deteriorating climate. Several enclaves in the higher latitudes were approaching non-viability. Two ships, Exodus-4 and Exodus-5, were due to launch this month. The UN had confirmed that the island nations would be sent to Poseidon. The question on the table was whether we needed to switch the order of emigration, or whether we could just move the troubled enclaves into the vacated territories. Everyone had an opinion, and every opinion seemed to be different.

I leaned back and looked around. I’d just realized that Homer wasn’t here. He usually popped in to mock the UN meetings. I think I was starting to depend on his satirical take on things to get me through the tedium.

Looked like I’d have to get through this one the old-fashioned way. I activated sandbox Bob and handed off the video window. Freedom.





19. Prey

Bob

June 2172

Delta Eridani

Archimedes patiently tied two strands of vine together while the cub watched. I smiled, observing the tableau in the video window. His mate, Diana, kept one eye on the drone. She had never liked the drones, or me, and still tensed up when one was around. Having a child to protect just made her that much touchier.

Archimedes was oblivious. He was too busy teaching his cub basic skills. The cub took the vines and, tongue sticking out of a corner of his mouth, tied a perfect granny knot. Archimedes sighed and corrected it into a square knot. The cub smiled up at his father and I experienced a jolt of—well, something. Pride? Envy? Wistfulness? Maybe all of the above. It was hard to sort out. My eyes were watering, and I had to suppress a strong urge to re-watch one of the recordings of Riker’s chats with our family.

I minimized the window and turned to see Marvin watching me. He said nothing, and after a moment he dropped his eyes and went back to what he was working on.

I took a few deep breaths and brought the window back up. The cub had successfully executed a square knot, although he still didn’t seem to be clear on the difference. I chuckled. I’d given Archimedes some sailing knots over the last while, and he was learning them, one at a time. It looked like he was trying to pass that knowledge on to his cub.

The boy would be given a Naming Ceremony as soon as he said his first word. Both Archimedes and I expected that to happen earlier than average. The Deltans quite reasonably considered language to be the difference between them and animals, and the first use of language was the proof that the child had, for want of a better word, a soul. The Deltan word didn’t quite mean the same thing, but it was close enough.

Diana was still eyeing me, so I decided to give her a break. I told Archimedes that I was going to go for a cruise around, then took off.

I brought the drone up to a kilometer altitude and rotated slowly. It was still early in a beautiful spring day, and dew sparkled on the trees and grass. This part of Eden was mostly forest, but there were enough meadows and open areas to allow grazing animals to make a living. I was making a point of recording panoramas like this whenever I could. Someday, maybe ten thousand years in the future, the Deltans would be civilized, and would probably have done something to Eden similar to what humans had done to Earth in the twentieth century. It would be nice to be able to show them what their world had once been like. I wondered if I would still be hanging around here by then.

Wow, I needed to shake off this melancholy mood. I enjoyed hanging with Archimedes, but once in a while it triggered images of my parents and sisters. When that happened, a change of scenery was in order.

I instructed the drone to fly back to Camelot and take up station-keeping, and I switched to a drone stationed at one of the Lagrange autofactories.

The armaments project was overdue for inspection, anyway. I had a section, carefully separated from everything else, where I was experimenting with explosives and munitions manufacture. I was playing with the idea of a shell powered by plastics instead of gunpowder. A primer triggered by an electrical current would remove the need for a hammer. Using ethylene glycol as the binder would result in a compound that was usable under all environmental conditions, including extreme cold. And the stuff didn’t become unstable with age. Oh, and it was easier to work with safely than gunpowder.

I moved on to the main autofactory area. Four replicant matrices were currently nearing completion, to give life to the version-3 Heaven vessels lined up nearby. I hadn’t decided yet if I wanted to upgrade myself as well. Granted, the threes were significantly faster than my version-2 hull; but I had no immediate need for speed. Everything in the Delta Eridani system was accessible by drone. I seldom had any need to fire up my SURGE drive. Come to think of it, I hadn’t left orbit around Eden in years.

Despite my ongoing reluctance to replicate, I felt a moral obligation to get more of me out into the universe. Besides the simple fact that more Bobs exploring meant more interesting revelations, there was the implied promise to Dr. Landers to perform the task that he’d resurrected me for. By extension, I had a responsibility to what was left of the human race. Riker was doing a magnificent job of getting them off-planet. It was up to the rest of us to find places for them to go.

My brooding was interrupted by a text from Marvin. There’s been an attack.

I sent the drone back to station-keeping and re-entered my VR. Marvin was waiting.

“Gorilloids?” I asked, sitting down.

“No, I think it might be our Giant Claw. A foraging party was out gathering food when one of them was grabbed. They say they couldn’t really see it, except they got the impression it was really big. It flew away with the victim, and everyone else high-tailed it back to Camelot.”

“What do you mean, they couldn’t really see it? Did it jump out of a tree?”

“Um, no, that’s the thing. They were looking right at it but couldn’t make it out. The Deltans didn’t really have a word for it, and the translation routine was having fits, then finally settled on invisible.”

“Ah, jeez. So a giant flying thing that can become fully or partly invisible, or maybe blend in…” I trailed off as I watched Marvin’s eyes get bigger. “Umm…?”

He flipped through the archives and pulled up a video segment from my early investigation of Eden, back before I’d even found the Deltans. The video depicted what I’d named a hippogriff. About the size of a robin, this little critter had four legs and a set of wings. It was predatory, and it could hide in plain sight because it could…

… change its coloration to match the environment. Oh, crap.

“They’d be a lot bigger than this little guy, but what the Deltans sort of saw would fit the bill.” I nodded at Marvin. “Good catch. But we still don’t know where it comes from, right?”

Marvin shook his head. “I’m still searching outward from Camelot. I’ve reached the ocean in one direction, but still lots of land left at the other compass points. I’m biasing it towards the original Deltan territory, although that’s not a sure thing either.”

“The big question,” I said slowly, “is whether any of our drones saw it.”

“I already checked. There weren’t any in the area. Everything we could spare is out searching. Somehow this thing snuck inside our perimeter.”

“Wonderful. Wonder-freaking-ful. I haven’t just brought the Deltans back to the fire, I’ve put them back in the frying pan. Some sky god!”

* * *

I watched from a distance as the tribal elders gathered to discuss the recent death. I wasn’t invited to attend, since I was probably the subject under discussion, and I didn’t feel like forcing the issue. Archimedes was told to be there, and he looked nervous enough for both of us. He and Diana exchanged frightened looks before he left.

The meeting went on for quite a while, and there was a lot of gesticulating and yelling. I’d probably never mentioned directional microphones to the Deltans, so I guess I couldn’t blame them for not realizing that I could hear everything.

Archimedes passed on my theories, which in retrospect probably made things worse. But it would have come out sooner or later. The central theme of the meeting, though, revolved around whether I was malicious or just an idiot. Either way, a lot of people believed that they’d been safer back at the old site.

Objectively, that wasn’t true. They’d been slowly going extinct, and wouldn’t have lasted more than another generation or so. But explaining population trends to essentially innumerate people was a losing game. They understood death when it happened in front of them, far better than they understood attrition.

The meeting took about two hours. When Archimedes came back to his spot, he looked very hangdog. He sat down and accepted a piece of jerky from Diana.

“They’re about evenly split,” he explained. “Half think you’ve led us here to be food for the flying things. The other half ask how you could have known about these things if we didn’t know. And we’re from here.”

I thought about that and sighed. If the Deltans had been human, those would have been the two camps, but the split wouldn’t have been fifty-fifty. Deltans were surprisingly rational.

“You’re not in trouble, are you?”

“Not really.” Archimedes glanced at Diana and smiled ruefully. “But my, uh, stock is down. I think that’s how you say it.”

“Don’t worry about it, Archimedes. You’re still the best damned weapon-maker in, well, anywhere. If you need to distance yourself from me for a while, that’s fine. But either way, Marvin and I will continue to look for the hippogriffs.”

Archimedes nodded. His cub toddled up and dropped into his lap. Head-first.

* * *

“Well, that explains it,” Marvin said. “I stopped at the shoreline and I shouldn’t have. The things seem to be centered on a rookery out on this island…” Marvin pointed to a large island a kilometer or two offshore. Obviously volcanic in origin, it was steep, deeply folded, and very probably had a lot of lava tubes that would make perfect homes for large flying things.

“How many of them are there?”

“Can’t tell for sure.” Marvin shrugged. “They’re always coming and going during the day, but unless I start tagging them, I don’t know how many nests or dens or whatever are in those caves. But certainly scores of adults, at minimum.”

I frowned. “That’s a significant population of predators. So what do they eat when they can’t get Deltan?”

Marvin waved up a picture. “Seals. Well, seal-equivalents. Or maybe closer to walruses. They seem to fill the same niche. They spend most of their down-time basking on the beach, and they hunt in the water. They’re a little more mobile than seals or sea-lions, but still basically sitting ducks on land. Although I’d imagine they could do some damage with those tusks.”

I stared at the picture for a few milliseconds, rubbing my chin. I turned to the globe and expanded it until it showed just the island and the Deltans’ past and current range. “So the hippogriffs discovered the Deltans, who were probably easier prey, chased them out of their original territory…”

Marvin continued the thought. “Then eventually caught up with them after they moved into gorilloid territory. The Deltans could handle the gorilloids, with flint weapons to help, but they couldn’t handle both predators. They retreated over the mountain range…”

“…which put them out of range of the hippogriffs, but lost them the flint resource. Without that, they couldn’t quite hold their own against the gorilloids,” I finished.

“And then we, and by we I mean you, led them back to the flint site. Where they are, once again, on the menu.” Marvin gazed at me with one eyebrow raised. “So what now?”

I sat down, called up coffee, and leaned back in thought. “I think we can agree that just doing nothing is off the table?” Marvin nodded and I continued, “Likewise, asking the Deltans to move again is probably a non-starter. I doubt they’d do it even if I had a good, safe destination in mind.”

“Plus, the flint site really is their best long-term bet, generally speaking.”

[Approaching predator detected]

We both looked up at Guppy’s announcement. We’d used all available drones to set up a tighter perimeter around Camelot, and set them to looking specifically for anything large and airborne. It appeared we had a bite.

I pulled up the video that Guppy offered. The hippogriff was hard to make out. On a clear day, it would have been almost impossible to see, the blue of its hide matched the sky so well. But today there were too many scattered clouds for the animal to camouflage itself from all angles. It was heading directly for Camelot. There was no doubt in my mind of its intentions. And this was almost certainly the one that had taken the Deltan two weeks ago.

“Right, let’s busterize it.” I called up a buster and set it to full acceleration. It shot towards the hippogriff.

At the very last moment, though, the hippogriff dodged the bullet. Literally. The thing’s speed and aerial agility was unbelievable.

We both stared for a few milliseconds, then I called up more busters.

“Don’t overdo it,” Marvin cautioned. “Let’s find out what the animal is capable of. We know we can get it if we throw enough busters at it. Let’s find out what ‘enough’ means.”

I nodded at him, and ordered most of my second wave to stand down. Instead, I sent in two busters in the fore/aft formation that Riker had used so successfully in the Battle of Sol.

Again, the hippogriff dodged the first buster. The speed of the animal was really impressive. But it was unable to correct for the second one. The splat created a cloud of fine red mist, which settled slowly to the forest below.

“I didn’t like that,” Marvin said. “We got it with the second one, but it was close. I think if we want to take them out dependably, we should go with an encirclement using three or more busters.”

“The question is whether this was a one-off or whether they fly some kind of patrol pattern. Maybe there won’t be any more coming this way.”

Marvin didn’t look convinced. “Predators almost always have a patrol pattern of some kind, if only to protect their territory from competitors. I doubt we’ve seen the last of them.”

* * *

It took less than a day to prove Marvin right.

[Multiple incoming detected]

Oh, God, this just keeps getting worse. I pulled up the window and leaned forward. It was hard to tell from the returns, but it looked like about a dozen hippogriffs, give or take a few, were bearing down on Camelot.

“What the hell?” Marvin said, popping in. “What’s attracting them?”

“Just a guess, but I’d say the blood in the air yesterday from the busterized hippogriff. I’m sure a predator would be able to smell the spoor for miles. Maybe it draws them like sharks.”

“Oh for— okay, a dozen of them will require thirty-six busters. We don’t have that available.”

“We’re going to have to wing it, Marv. They’re in a fairly tight group. Maybe we can thin them out some of the first pass.”

Marvin nodded, and we called up the twenty busters that we had available. I ordered Guppy to fly in reinforcements from orbit, and we set the ones we had on a direct line of attack with maximum acceleration. By the time they neared the flock of hippogriffs, they were doing about Mach 1.5.

The first pass took about five hippogriffs, and allowed us to see that there had been fourteen total. Now, we had fifteen busters left for nine attackers. There was a good possibility one or two might reach Camelot.

While the busters were coming around for another pass, I activated one of the drones in Camelot. I flew towards the first recognizable face I saw, which was Arnold.

Everyone was looking in the direction of the sonic booms, staring at the red clouds that had appeared. I shouted at Arnold, “Hippogriffs coming. Get everyone under cover!”

I shifted back to my VR without waiting to see if Arnold reacted. The busters were just coming in for the second pass, and Marvin had stacked them two-deep. The leftover buster trailed the group, ready to take out a target of opportunity.

The second pass took out three hippogriffs, and injured the wing of a fourth. The clouds of red were now making it hard to see. SUDDAR was not particularly effective with biomass—bodies showed up as dim ghosts—and infra-red was having a lot of trouble with all the fresh blood floating around.

The injured hippogriff lost altitude quickly, but it was a controlled descent. We probably couldn’t depend on the impact killing it. We now had eleven busters—no, nine. Two busters had collided and taken each other out—and five attackers left. It was going to be tight, unless they turned around and retreated. If they were anything like sharks with blood-spoor, though, that wasn’t going to happen.

The busters came around for a third pass. There were fewer hippogriffs now, though, and they were spreading out. And the damned things really had quick reflexes. Despite buster pairing, we only took out three of the attackers. We were down to six busters, and had two healthy and one injured hippogriff to deal with. Still reasonable odds, except that they were now close enough to Camelot to present a real danger. And we didn’t have the uninterrupted line anymore for a supersonic approach.

“Switch to bludgeoning and harassment. Guppy, where are the reinforcements?”

[Five minutes out]

Not good enough. I checked the action in Camelot. The mesa didn’t have much in the way of caves or any other kind of overhead protection. It was ideal for protection from a ground assault, not an air attack. The Deltans were streaming out of the village, down the two available paths. But with the bottleneck, they couldn’t get the whole tribe evacuated in time, and they would be sitting ducks until they reached the trees.

We commenced low-speed bludgeoning of the hippogriffs. They were even better at dodging at this speed, but they couldn’t really do anything else at the same time.

We finally managed to bounce one off the head of a hippogriff. It went down immediately. The other hippogriff ignored the byplay and tried to take a pass at the Deltans on one of the paths. But the busters kept it too distracted and it passed overhead without completing the attack. Unfortunately, a couple of Deltans panicked and fell or leaped off the path. I could see them tumbling down the steep scree.

The Deltan hunters laid into the unconscious hippogriff. It was my first opportunity to get a good feel for relative scale. If the Deltans were human-sized, then the hippogriffs were about the size of a Clydesdale, with bat-like wings. The animals looked more reptilian than anything. Teeth and claws were disproportionately large, resulting in an impression of something built for nothing but killing.

It took only a few seconds for the Deltan hunters to ensure that the animal wouldn’t be waking up. The live hippogriff, though, was still a major threat, and I had no idea where the injured one had gotten to.

The busters continued to harass the healthy hippogriff, and it apparently decided to reduce the defensive zone by landing. Well, not a bad strategy, really. Now the busters could only buzz it from above.

As it landed, the hippogriff changed its coloration to match the ground and rocks, but no one was going to be fooled at this stage. The animal snapped at the busters as they came within range, and it managed to snag one. It looked as though this would turn into a process of attrition, until the Deltans brought in their “A” game. Twenty to thirty spears flew at the animal in a solid cloud. Fast or not, the hippogriff simply couldn’t dodge that amount of incoming. Within moments, it resembled a pincushion. The hippogriff screeched and snapped at the spears sticking out of it. Arnold grabbed another spear from someone, ran straight toward the hippogriff, and made an Olympic-caliber throw from point-blank range. The spear went right through the animal’s neck and it dropped instantly.

There were cheers from the hunters. The jubilation lasted only a moment, however. Screams from the retreating tribespeople brought our attention back to the paths out of Camelot. The injured hippogriff had made its way to the base of the scree, found one of the people who had fallen, and was eating him.

I sent all my remaining busters straight at it, with no allowance for pulling up if they missed. Two impacted with enough force to kill the last animal. It was too late for the Deltan, though.

* * *

The good news, if it could be called good, was that we’d only lost three Deltans. A fourth had a broken leg, and I was going to have a confrontation with the medicine woman if she didn’t listen to me this time. I’d lost eighteen of my twenty busters. Twenty more made it down from orbit, too late to do any good. And once again I was pulling all my printers off of their assigned duties to make more busters.

The Deltans had called another tribal council. For them, two councils in a month was akin to panic. This time, I was invited, or maybe summoned. I doubted it was to give me a medal.

I had noticed that some people were giving Archimedes a bit of cold shoulder. They couldn’t overdo it, of course. He and Moses were still the only source of shaped flint, and Moses wasn’t moving around much these days. If I was to describe the attitude in human terms, it would be “coldly formal.” Since Archimedes hadn’t done anything to deserve it, I had to conclude that it was guilt by association.

Arnold was sitting in council now. After that display with the hippogriff, he was man of the hour. Hopefully that would mean at least one sympathetic voice.

There was some discussion among themselves, then they called me over. I floated down to head height and waited.

“Are there any other surprises that you have for us?” Hoffa said without preamble.

“That was a surprise to me, too. You’ll remember that I asked why you’d left Camelot. Only Axler had an inkling, and he didn’t remember enough to warn us.”

“Just the same, by following your advice, we seem to get deeper and deeper into trouble.”

“By following my advice, you’ve retaken a location that you can defend against gorilloids and that has flint for weapons. I know a lot of you have trouble following my explanation, but I maintain that in the old camp, your children would have been the last of the Deltans.”

I paused for dramatic effect before continuing. “As for the hippogriffs, they’re a problem because they’re a surprise. I’m going to find out more about them, then I’m going to remove them.”

“I’ve noticed,” Hoffa said, “that despite your talk, it’s still we who do most of the fighting.”

“Really? When was the last time a group of your hunters had to beat off a gorilloid attack? Did you hear the sonic booms? Two hands and four hippogriffs approached Camelot, but only three arrived.”

Hoffa’s ears were straight back and his eyes were narrowed to slits. I was mishandling this, but I couldn’t stop myself. I’d never been able to handle shortsighted stupidity.

“That’s three more than would have arrived at our old camp.”

In VR, Marvin and I rolled our eyes in sync.

“I’ve already talked about that.”

“Perhaps next time, we should leave your Archimedes out as an offering for them.”

I sent the drone straight up ten feet. “Don’t. Ever. Threaten. My. Family. Not ever.” As I finished saying the words, I realized that I’d turned the volume up. It had probably been painful to sensitive Deltan ears. The entire council was cringing, and possibly not just from the volume.

I slowly lowered the drone back to head-height. “I mean it, Hoffa. I’ll take care of the hippogriffs. And thanks to you, I’ve figured out how.”

Hoffa looked confused and somewhat concerned. I noticed that Arnold looked at Hoffa and smiled.

* * *

“Okay, I’ll bite.” Marvin was grinning at me. “How? And how did Hoffa help with it?”

I glared at him. “I’m going to drop a rock on the island. Which is what I wanted to do to Hoffa.”

“Jeez, Bob, here you go again. You’re going to perform planetary ecological surgery just because it’s convenient.”

“No, Marvin.” I jumped to my feet. “I’m going to do it because those things threaten my family. And you can analyze that all you want. I don’t give a damn.” I closed down his VR connection and he disappeared, effectively kicked out. Pretty rude, and I’d be apologizing later. But for the moment, I was too steamed to care.

* * *

I had a far more immediate problem, though. Assuming I was right about the hippogriffs smelling blood, then today’s battle would bring yet another wave tomorrow—maybe much larger. It would take time to find a large enough mass to destroy the island. I calculated an initial size of a hundred tons would about do it. We had identified a number of nickel-iron asteroids in the system, some of which would be about the right size.

I received a ping from Marvin. It was time to eat crow. I invited him in, and we looked at each other warily.

He broke the silence first. “You know we’re no good with this crap, right?”

It was enough. I broke down laughing, and we nodded at each other. Done. Possibly identical twins could come close to understanding, but certainly no one else.

We sat down and I described my thoughts on the impactor.

“Huh,” he replied. “So, a couple of months to build Bill’s asteroid mover, a couple more weeks to move the asteroid into place. You think the hippogriffs will just wait around?”

“I’m open to suggestions.”

“I understand you’re angry, Bob, and you want to smash the island to smithereens. But all you need to do is hammer it enough to take out the hippogriff population. You don’t need a Yucatan-level event to do that.”

I nodded. “So, a bunch of small impactors?”

“A thousand-pound steel ball will do a lot of damage.”

“Ohhhhhh…” I nodded. “Ship busters. Yeah, I’ve still got four in inventory.”

“The thing is, though, Bob, you don’t want too big of a bang. Tsunamis, ground shocks, flying debris could do more damage to the Deltans than a bunch of hippogriffs. Get this wrong, and you could be directly responsible for the extinction of the Deltan species.”

I nodded, shocked. Time to get my temper under control.

* * *

We decided to use the ship-busters one at a time and gauge the results after each strike. I sent the first ship-buster in at what I hoped was a reasonably sedate velocity.

The results were slightly more, um, spectacular than expected.

In retrospect, maybe I didn’t allow for the amount of material that would normally be shed by a meteor on the way down. Or I forgot to carry the two. Whatever the reason, the impact produced a mushroom cloud that would have done a fission bomb proud. As the smoke and dust cleared, it was obvious that the island, and the hippogriffs, were gone.

Well, that was the good news.

The bad news was that this was definitely going to produce ground shocks all the way to Camelot. And at least some debris. I flew several drones over to the camp, to find everyone already awake, staring at the bright cloud to the southwest.

Archimedes looked up at the drone as I arrived. “Did you do that?” he said in a hushed voice.

I wasn’t sure of the expression on his face. Awe, certainly, but I thought maybe a bit of fear. I hoped not. That wasn’t the legacy I wanted to leave.

“Yeah, Archimedes. That’s the hippogriff island being obliterated.”

Archimedes’ eyes grew wider and his ears went down. He took a half-step back from me.

Damn.

At that moment, the ground shock arrived. It wasn’t the worst earthquake I’d ever seen, but was probably the first in the Deltans’ experience. They hugged the ground, and there were many screams.

The shaking was brief. It was followed a few minutes later by the sound of the explosion. The crack and roar seemed to go on forever, but couldn’t have been a minute in all. The Deltans continued to huddle until it let up.

But now came the hard part. I went to the elders. “There may be some burning rocks falling from the sky, in about a hundred heartbeats or so. You should get everyone into the lee side of the bluff.”

There were wide eyes and flattened ears, but no one was going to argue with me. In short order, every Deltan was huddled behind the central bluff.

The debris arrived right on time. Drones hadn’t been able to detect anything big. I hoped that would hold, as I wasn’t really sure I could intercept incoming debris with a buster. Or if it would do any good.

The pelting lasted several minutes. It was impressive, and there was some minor damage to the village, but no one was hurt. The Deltans huddled for the rest of the night, unwilling to leave the sanctuary of the rock.

* * *

When morning finally came, people spread back out to their normal locations. A few of them had to do some cleanup, but their neighbors pitched in. Overall, the amount of actual damage was minor.

The council was having yet another session. Again, though, I wasn’t expecting a medal.

When they were done, they motioned to the drone. I flew it over, and Hoffa stepped forward. “We understand what you’ve done. We understand your explanations. But everything you ask, everything you do, seems to come with a larger and larger cost. We’re not sure if we’re better off now or not. There’s a lot of argument about that.”

He paused for a moment, a determined look on his face, then faced me squarely. “We’d like you to go away. We’ll face our fate ourselves. If you want to kill us, we can’t stop you. If you want to kill me, I can’t do anything about it. But you’re not welcome here anymore.”

I stared at him, through the drone, for what seemed like forever. I was frozen. Numb. It was too much to process. The emotional circuit breaker had tripped. I’d lost a family already, now I was losing a second one.

I backed out of the drone, and turned to Marvin. His face was grey. I was sure I didn’t look any better. “I guess I screwed up,” I said.

“Look, let’s just clear out for now,” he replied. “Give things time to cool off. You can talk to Archimedes later.”

I nodded, and re-entered the drone. I floated over to Archimedes, who was not looking well. Deltans didn’t display shock the same as humans. His facial fur was lying in disorganized mats. But the wide eyes and flat ears were probably universal. A disconnected part of me started theorizing about why that might be, and I squashed it.

“Archimedes, I’m going to take off until things cool down. I’ll talk to you later.”

He nodded. I noted that Diana had a look on her face of either satisfaction or triumph. I’d never hated anyone as much as I despised her at that moment.





20. Parasite

Howard

October 2189

Vulcan

Things that make you go “Ew!” This definitely qualified. I couldn’t take my eyes off the video, as the doctor made an incision on the patient and proceeded to extract a small bundle of eggs. A few had hatched and the larvae were trying to burrow away. At that moment, right there, I was so thankful that I was no longer biological.

I glanced at Butterworth’s video feed and noticed that he was paying an extreme level of attention to his glass of Jameson. Huh, not a bad idea. I invoked a glass of Sam’s cognac and turned on my alcohol receptors. A slight buzz was just what the doctor ordered.

Finally, thank the Universe, the video ended. Butterworth turned to look at the video camera. A slight smile formed when he saw the glass in my hand. I shrugged a “what about it?” shrug.

“The parasite appears to be a large insect,” he explained. “The bite itches a bit, then disappears. When the eggs have grown enough, though, it becomes a large swollen area. By that point, we have less than a day to remove the eggs.”

“What if you don’t?” I knew I would regret asking, but I couldn’t stop myself.

“The larvae go for the heart. Fatal within two days or so. Then the larvae feast on the corpse. That seems to be the life cycle. We’ve lost four people and two cattle so far. The doctors think they might be able to come up with a blood test, but I can’t see poking every colonist every other day to draw blood.”

“Wonderful. Have we caught any adults yet?”

Butterworth shook his head. “No, nor do we have very good descriptions, other than that it’s about hummingbird-size. We’re working on it, but I was hoping you might be able to throw in some surveillance drones.”

“I’ll crank up the autofactory and start pumping them out. I’ll also see if I can modify the video and audio pickups to be more sensitive to insect sound and movement.”

Butterworth nodded to me and signed off. I gave orders to Guppy for the changes to the autofactory schedules, then sat back and shook my head. Gross.

* * *

The Spits and FAITH colonies were done offloading to Romulus. Colonists were staying in temporary quarters until the towns were built. AMI construction equipment worked full speed to clear some land and set out street plans. We’d learned from the USE’s experience on Vulcan, and we were building a fence right away. The wildlife on Romulus wasn’t nearly as big or plentiful, but there was a joke going around about carnivorous rabbits. Everyone was fine with excess caution.

The FAITH and Spits colonies were set up on separate continents. The land area on Romulus was divided into eight land masses, each about the size of Australia, and a number of smaller archipelagos. Separation of nations wouldn’t be a problem.

The really important item, from my point of view, was that our relatives were now awake. As part of our deal with Cranston, Julia Hendricks and family owned a communicator, so didn’t have to schedule time on the colony system.

At the appointed hour, I connected to the conference that Riker was advertising. I noted with a chuckle that we were up over thirty Bobs subscribing to the feed. I watched as Riker made the call and Julia came online. A dozen or so random family members jostled for position behind her in the video. And on her lap, with pride of place, was Space Cadet Justin.

“Unca’ Will!” he yelled.

“Hey, Cadet. Enjoy the space-ship ride?”

I could hear the pride and joy in Riker’s voice. I and every other Bob shared it. These were our sisters’ descendants, and a major reason why we put up with idiots like Cranston and VEHEMENT. I remembered Milo, who had expressed a strong lack of caring about humanity’s fate. A momentary wave of sadness washed over me at his memory. I wondered what he would have thought of the current situation.

I pulled myself back to the present, where Julia was talking about their experience. Well, trying to. Justin didn’t seem willing to give up the floor.

“…An’ we went in the big ship an’ we sat and it was boring an’ then there was a bump an’ they took us down a big hallway an’ they gave me a needle which I hated an’ they made me sleepy an’ they put me in a box an’…”

Amazing. He didn’t even seem to be stopping to breathe. The soliloquy went on for another minute, while Julia increasingly failed to keep a grin off her face. Finally, having said what he needed to say, he yelled, “Bye Unca’ Will” and shot out of frame. This prompted laughter from everyone, family and Bobs both.

Julia turned back to Riker with a smile on her face. “He has two speeds. Asleep, and what you just saw.”

One of the family members, who I remembered as Philip something, leaned forward. “Will, how long until some other colony gets planted on Romulus?”

Riker shook his head. “Can’t say. We’ve got two more colony ships heading to your system right now, but the enclave leaders will decide whether they want to settle on Vulcan or Romulus. Howard tells me that Romulus is looking a lot more attractive these days, though.”

There were chuckles from the family. News of the raptors had already spread.

Riker talked to Julia for a few more minutes, fielded some questions from other family members, and got Julia to promise to call him as soon as they were in private residences.

Then, it was over. As Riker hung up the call, I sat back to bask in the peculiar mix of joy, wistfulness, and melancholy that seeing our family always left me with. I had talked with a few other Bobs about it—it seemed to be a common reaction. I guess Original Bob wasn’t as much of a loner as he’d always claimed.

I signed off of the conference call, and turned to Guppy, who had been hovering.

“What?”

[Colonel Butterworth wants to talk to you. They’ve caught a parasite adult]

* * *

Ugly little bugger.

Hummingbird-size turned out to be a little bit of an exaggeration, but it was still one of the biggest insects I’d ever seen. I didn’t much care for insects, and I had an urge to stomp on this one. It looked like some odd combination of hornet and spider, with two sets of wings. The stinger was particularly nasty-looking. Retractable, it could inject eggs in its victim up to an inch deep.

I had to turn off my gag reflex, watching the necropsy.

Well, now we had specifics. I bundled up all the data and shot off an email to Bill, asking for suggestions. Then I connected to Butterworth.

“Howard. You’ve seen our new neighbor?”

“Yeah, not my favorite creature. I’ve sent something off to Bill, and I’ve got a couple dozen new drones ready. I’ll program them with the data and get them to scan the area. See what we come up with.”

Butterworth nodded and disconnected.

The colonel looked outwardly calm, but I knew this was worrying him. Big things like raptors, we could handle. Small stuff, not so much. Humanity could conceivably end up prisoners in their own homes if we didn’t get control of this pest.





21. Attacks Continue

Riker

December 2174

Sol

“We lost a cargo drone,” Charles said, popping into VR. “There was an explosive package waiting where it landed. As soon it touched down, the bomb went off.”

He sat down and accepted a coffee from Jeeves. “It was a supply delivery to Vancouver Island. They’ve still got enough of a fishery that they’re not facing immediate starvation, but the loss of equipment and resources is still painful.”

I looked up and muttered a few choice expletives. “I take it we lost the entire food shipment?”

Charles nodded. “I thought we had the landing area completely secured. VEHEMENT has already claimed responsibility. They’re getting trickier.”

A light blinked on my console. Not surprisingly, it was Premier Grady. I accepted the call.

“We seem to have lost our delivery,” he said without preamble. “I saw the announcement. I do not blame you for this—you could just as soon blame me. However, the problem remains of hungry mouths to feed. What can be done?”

“Short term, sir, I’m going to put together another delivery. Homer is in your area, so he’ll arrange a time and place over a short-range laser link. No chance of intercepting the communication that way.” I turned to look at Homer. He nodded and disappeared.

I thought for a second, then turned back to the video call. “Meanwhile, I think that VEHEMENT has graduated to major threat. They’re not going to go away, and they’re no longer just a nuisance.”

I talked to Grady for a few more moments, going over some backlogged items. Then he looked to his right and announced that he was receiving the connection from Homer. His eyes moved across the video screen for a few moments, then he turned back to me and nodded.

After he disconnected, Charles said, “We also have the issue of the Florianópolis attacks.”

“I know, Charles. A lot of people still blame Brazil for the war. I guess they’re taking out their frustrations and getting some revenge. We have a task force going on that already. I just don’t know how hard they’re working on it. There seems to be a lot of sympathy for those terrorist attacks.”

“Less so for the supply chain attacks, even though fewer lives are lost.” Charles shrugged. “Hits closer to home, I guess.”

* * *

There had been sabotage on one of the donuts. Some chemicals had been introduced into the irrigation system and had killed three sections of kudzu before the automated systems caught on and shut everything down for inspection.

This VEHEMENT group was good. The only people that had legitimate access to the space farms were the Bobs. Since VEHEMENT demonstrably was able to gain access, we had to consider all other means. Ideas for how they might have done it included fake drones controlled by VEHEMENT, stealth devices piggy-backing up from Earth on returning delivery vehicles, or even hacking of our legitimate drones. None of those alternatives really seemed realistic, but then that was the thing about being a good hacker. If people saw it coming, you wouldn’t be able to get away with it.

I set my AMI monitors to reviewing all traffic for the last month. Even if they found nothing, I was at least eliminating possibilities. I was archiving everything, though, in case I got inspired at some later date. Somewhere in all the communications around Earth, there had to be exchanges between VEHEMENT members.

I went back to review, yet again, everything in the libraries about cryptography.





22. Fallout

Bob

December 2173

Delta Eridani

“Archimedes.”

Archimedes stopped in mid-step and looked wildly around. “Bawbe?”

I cancelled the camouflage on the drone for a moment so he could locate it. He grunted an acknowledgement and settled carefully to the ground to sit, leaning against a tree. I brought the drone down to eye level, then re-engaged the camouflage.

“I don’t think you’re going to be allowed back.” The statement was delivered in a low voice, without looking at the drone. “Since you were banished, there have been no attacks.”

“That’s because I’ve killed six hippogriffs so far that were heading your way,” I replied. I was irritated, and I let it show in my tone.

Archimedes looked at the drone, eyes wide. “You’re still protecting us?”

“You’re still important to me, Archimedes. Especially you and your family. Speaking of which, how is Buster doing?”

Archimedes smiled fondly. “He wants to help me make tools now. Of course, all he does is bash rocks together, but it’s a start.” He lost the smile and looked down for a moment before continuing, “I’m getting a lot of what you call cold shoulder, still. Some of the other cubs have started to tease Buster. I don’t want you to go away forever, but I can’t have my family affected.”

“I understand, Archimedes. I still need to get you up to speed with the bow and arrow eventually, but it can wait. The thing to remember is that I didn’t wipe out the hippogriffs, just the local nest. As a species, they’re still out there, and your area is effectively unclaimed territory for them now. You need to be ready to hold them off. At minimum, you need to have a supply of extra spears. And the bows and arrows will give you more range.”

“Okay. I’ve been playing around with the short spears, uh, arrows. I told people they’re small spears for Buster. They laugh, but they believe me. The bow part, why does it have to be different materials?”

“Laminated material is stronger and has much better spring. Eventually you’ll glue it, but for now, tying is good enough.”

We talked for a while longer: plans for new weapons, suggestions for the medicine woman, basic math. I would bring these people out of the stone age one way or another.

Eventually, Archimedes got up, said goodbye, and headed back to Camelot. It was enough. It was a good day.

* * *

Marvin had something to say again. I could always tell. He would open his mouth, then close it, then try again. I wasn’t sure if I should be concerned or not. Last time, it had been hippogriffs. Not a good track record.

Finally, he managed to squeeze it out. “I think I’m going to be heading out, soon.”

I froze for almost half a second. “As in, leaving Delta Eridani?”

“Yeah. Bob, you’ve done a lot with the Deltans, but I think it’s past the point where it needs two of us. This is a caretaker situation, now.” He made a gesture at the video window I’d been watching. “Truthfully, the council kicking you out was probably a good thing for them. They go back to deciding their own destiny. You can still tweak things here and there, but the sky god business really wasn’t healthy. For you or for them.”

I thought about being offended, getting mad, but the truth was that I’d been having very similar thoughts. I dropped my eyes and nodded. “Still, it won’t be the same without you around to give Guppy bad greeting lines.”

“Hell, Bob, with SCUT we’re never really out of touch. If I keep my speed below .75 C, my tau won’t go high enough to preclude VR. I might just seem a little groggy to you.”

“Funny, it still doesn’t feel the same.” I shrugged and paced back and forth a few times in silence. “I guess I understand, though, Marv. It’s always been my project. Luke and Bender knew that.”

“Sure wish they’d intercept the SCUT plans transmission,” Marvin commented, changing the subject. “It would be nice to know if they’re okay.”

I nodded and sat down. What a crap year this was turning into.

On the other hand, SCUT did make things a little easier. There were things to do, and Bobs to talk to.

I shook my head and sighed. The moping was pointless. I would always be able to find a laundry list of things to be depressed about, if I worked at it. The Deltans were still there, even if they weren’t talking to me at the moment.





23. VEHEMENT

Riker

September 2175

Sol

Pieces of space station mingled with desiccated plants and the carcasses of livestock that had been unlucky enough to be living on that donut. The debris had scattered with the explosion, but orbital mechanics and mutual gravity were bringing everything back together.

Homer’s image floated in the video window. “We’d just brought this one on-line. Six months’ work, gone.”

I nodded silently. The donuts were Homer’s babies. He’d come up with the idea and head-manned it to completion. This couldn’t be easy for him. “Any announcements?”

“Yeah. VEHEMENT. The usual crazy-ass rant. Humanity is a cancer, the universe is better off without them, blah, blah.”

“I’m sorry, buddy. But we’ll get them, one way or another.”

Homer was silent. His expression said everything. Sadness, anger, confusion. He wouldn’t meet my eyes. I felt guilty about all the bad thoughts I’d had about him in the past. He was a fully contributing member of the team, and this was killing him.

I was concerned about Homer. He had pretty much stopped ribbing me. Hadn’t called me number two in months. In fact, he seemed to have turned all business. I wondered if someone had offended him, but on the one occasion I’d tried to talk to him about it, he just deflected the conversation.

“We’ve got enough redundancy now that this won’t leave us dead in the water,” I said. “But with the reduced planetside output, it’s going to mean short rations. Or more kudzu.” I smiled, trying to lighten the mood. Homer wasn’t having any. He shrugged, then ended the connection.

“Guppy, what have we got relating to Farm-6?”

[Querying AMI team. One moment]

After a short delay, Guppy continued.

[No related transmissions detected. No nearby activity except by Heaven vessels]

Crap. They were covering their tracks too well. “Something will break. Something has to.”

Guppy didn’t comment. He wasn’t much on encouragement. Huge fishy eyes blinked once.

* * *

Just to really make my week, there were several terrorist attacks on Florianópolis as well. I kept wondering if there was some anniversary coming up that was triggering all the activity. The terrorists were getting smarter, and hitting more critical targets. One of the attacks had taken out the power system. It would take a couple of days to fix.

It wasn’t the first time that the actions of VEHEMENT and the Brazilian attacks seemed to be coordinated. I wondered if there was some connection. It was almost certainly two different groups, but maybe they were talking to each other, sharing intelligence. That could actually be of benefit to me.

The old Earth, pre-war, had global technology and every form of communications you could imagine. This post-apocalyptic reality was far more limited. There were fewer methods of communication for collusion between the two groups, or even cross-talk between VEHEMENT cells.

But I’d been monitoring all channels. At least everything I could think of. So either I’d missed some form of communication; or they were using some kind of steganography, which would be almost impossible to recognize unless you knew what you were looking for; or they had gone low-tech.

Option three would be too slow, number one I couldn’t do anything about, so that left two. Steganography was by definition inefficient, since you had to spread the message out enough for it to be unnoticeable. Therefore the transmission medium would have to allow a high bandwidth, which would immediately rule out a lot of possibilities. And there were statistical methods that could ferret out steganographic messages.

I retired to my VR, to give this more thought.





24. Visiting Marvin

Bob

March 2174

Delta Eridani

I hadn’t had to kill a hippogriff in months. It wasn’t clear if they’d learned to avoid the territory, or if there simply weren’t any left that were close enough to bother the Deltans. Since Marvin’s departure, I was handling all the drones myself. I could automate a certain amount of the tasks, but I still eventually had to review the mission recordings. Honestly, I couldn’t be bothered.

I kept my eye on Archimedes and his family, probably a little more than I should. I had occasional flashes of myself as the overbearing grandparent who kept wanting to visit. It was an embarrassing image, and I resolved to contact Archimedes a little less often.

Marvin was long gone, heading for Pi3 Orionis. I think he was hoping for an intelligent species that he could be in charge of. It seemed we actually had a paternal streak. Or maybe maternal. He was, as promised, keeping his top speed low enough so that he could still interface via SCUT connection. We’d found a balance, where he frame-jacked up a bit and I slowed my time-sense some, and we could then interact at the same time-rate. It worked.

Today, I was visiting Marvin. In Delta Eridani, as senior Bob, I generally played host. It was interesting that traditions and modes of behavior were developing even among a bunch of post-human computers. Generally, the senior Bob in any system was in charge, and played host to the other Bobs. It made sense to me, which meant it pretty much made sense to all the Bobs.

Marvin apparently had a bit of a luxury streak in him. His VR environment was an open-air patio and rancher-style house at the top of a low mountain, in a semi-tropical climate. The ocean stretched out in all directions, right out to the horizon.

It was a beautiful, if somewhat mundane scene, except for a couple of anomalies: the very close horizon, the low gravity, and the presence of Earth hanging in the middle of the sky.

“You know there’s no air on the moon, right?” I grinned at him.

Marvin shrugged. “I’m going through all the science fiction books I’ve read over the years and replicating the environments for a while. It’s interesting, and it’s good practice at VR programming.”

I nodded. It wasn’t really important. We were stalling, and we both knew it.

Finally, I brought up the elephant in the room. “My two newest clones, Pete and Victor, are almost ready to leave. Victor is willing to follow the trail of either Luke or Bender. Pete is not interested at all. We have to make a choice.”

Marvin took a moment to brush his hand through his hair. I remembered that habit from when I was Original Bob. Apparently death wasn’t enough to remove nervous tics.

“I guess Pete is adamant?” he asked.

“Yup. Like Milo with Earth. ‘This is the expression of not caring.’ He’s going off in whatever direction he decides on, and that’s that.”

Marvin chuckled. “A recurring theme. Great. Well, it’s a coin toss, then, isn’t it?”

“The thing is, Marv, what if something bad happened to both Luke and Bender? They were heading for different stars, but in the same general direction. What if they ran into something?”

“What, like the Borg? It just seems unlikely, Bob. What would be the motive?”

“Don’t know. Maybe another Medeiros. We don’t really have any information.” I shrugged, conceding the point. “Well, we’ll leave it up to Victor. He’ll transmit constantly over SCUT, so we’ll know if something happens to him.”

Marvin nodded, a worried look on his face.





25. Rabbits

Howard

November 2189

Vulcan

There was a call on my queue from one of the biologists. I was a little surprised. Normally I talked only to Butterworth—not there was a rule or anything. Still… curious, I dialed the call.

“Sheehy.” A woman appeared on screen for a moment, then disappeared off frame. I got an impression of thick red hair, tied into a ponytail.

“Dr. Sheehy? This is Howard Johansson, returning your call.”

Her disembodied voice drifted back to the phone. “Oh, thanks for getting back to me. Colonel Butterworth wanted me to call you if we had news. We have news.”

I waited for a moment. “And…”

She returned and grinned into the video. “Sorry. I love the drama. Anyway, we have a possible treatment for the vine.”

“Which is…” Honestly, Sheehy, keep this up and I’ll drop a rock on you.

“Bunnies.”

“I’m going to drop a rock on you.”

Dr. Sheehy laughed. I couldn’t help noticing that she had a great laugh. Also freckles, dimples when she laughed… I mentally slapped myself. This could go exactly nowhere.

She disappeared again, then returned holding a small section of plant. “Turns out rabbits not only are able to eat the vine, they seem to be attracted to it. I think the toxin is just added flavoring to them. Bad for the vine. Good for us.”

“Right, but we still have to expend a lot of effort to harvest the vine and get it to the rabbits. Could just as easily incinerate it.”

“No, no.” Dr. Sheehy shook her head. “Rabbits are self-replicating. Aggressively so. You may have heard…” She grinned at me. “And they make great stew.”

I smiled back at her. There was a certain poetry in the solution. Granted, we’d be unleashing a Terran scourge, even if a fluffy one, on an unsuspecting planet. But Vulcan attacked first. “Have you asked Butterworth about it?”

“He says council will have to approve. But they’re feeling a little humble these days. He thinks he can ram it through.”

“Well, all righty then.”

Dr. Sheehy paused for a moment before continuing. “You heard about the bronto attack yesterday?”

“Well, attack is not the right word. They tried to eat the fence again.”

“Yes, and we had to kill one that had figured out that he could just avoid the electrical wires. That’s one smart bronto. IQ up in the two, maybe three range.” Dr. Sheehy smiled at her own joke. “Anyway, before they airlifted the carcass away from the clearing, someone got the bright idea to cut off a big hunk of meat. It passed toxicology tests, and it passed the barbeque test. So now bronto is on the menu. You may find your kudzu sales dropping.”

“Whoa! You were not supposed to be hunting for sustenance until the impact studies are completed. Is the council good with this?”

Dr. Sheehy gave me an unbelieving look. “Try to picture the council telling twenty thousand people that they have to eat kudzu instead of steak, when steak is lumbering around in plain view every day. Can you say lynching?”

“Yeah, okay, point taken. Well, I still have the Romulan colony market. They don’t have bronto.”

Dr. Sheehy grinned and shrugged, then disconnected.

To be honest, this was good news from my point of view. The more the colonies could do themselves, the less I had to do. I could even conceivably take off in a decade or so.

And on that subject, the GUPPI-controlled surveillance system wasn’t going to build itself. Back to work.





26. Selling Poseidon

Riker

December 2175

Sol

“You seem incapable of preventing them from striking at will.” Ambassador Gerrold seemed to be enjoying the situation, which made his attempts at portraying anger unconvincing. I’d ignored his jibes in the past, but I was getting tired of it.

“And what have you been able to do, Ambassador? Found the source of those hacking attempts yet? Made any arrests? Got any suggestions? Anything besides endless carping?” I exchanged glares with the ambassador for a moment, then moved on. “We’re working on replacing the donut, but it’ll still be a few months. Plus whatever time it takes to get the farm regrown. There will be short rations for a while, but no starvation.” I had a sudden inspiration, one of those mid-action moments, and added, “VEHEMENT got lucky this time. We stop most of their attempts before they get anywhere. They aren’t really that smart.” It wasn’t true, but baiting them might force some kind of reaction. VEHEMENT depended on fear, and being publicly dissed might provoke a response.

Before anyone could comment, I turned off my audio, effectively giving up the floor. I turned to Guppy without moving my avatar. “Put everything we have on communications monitoring. I want to know who reacts to my words, and how. I want every byte accounted for.”

Guppy nodded and went into command fugue.

The session moved on to the emigration question. The Maldives and Micronesia had pretty much cemented their claim on Poseidon—partly due to lack of interest by the other enclaves. They needed about six hundred more people from other enclaves to form a full colony-ship complement, but they were having a hard time making that. No one wanted to split off from their group, especially to go to a planet so, um, specialized. It was attractive to islanders; to everyone else, not so much.

At the same time, other groups were trying to lay claim to the semi-completed ships for emigration to Vulcan or Romulus. The whole thing was acrimonious and mostly information-free.

[No detectable increase in Earthside traffic. One anomalous communication to spaceside]

Okay, that was something. “Source? Destination?”

[Source New Zealand, although not near any population centers. Destination Homer]

“Uh, excuse me?”

[It was a tight-beam signal. It would not have been detectable except for a chance alignment with one of our drones on cleanup duty]

Oh. Shit. That just did not make sense. Why would Homer be helping them? Why would he be sabotaging his own project? Unless he didn’t have a choice…

Suddenly Homer’s change in personality took on an ominous cast. It was very un-Homer-like. The complete cessation of jokes, the withdrawal from the rest of us…

Perhaps because it wasn’t Homer.

I sent a message to Charles, requesting a physical meet-up.





27. Luke Returns

Bob

March 2178

Delta Eridani

I walked through the village VR, watching the activity. There had been improvements in the six years since I’d been kicked out. I had enough hidden cameras and camouflaged drones around the village now to feed a real-time VR. No more recorded scenes.

Archimedes had finally started taking my tent design seriously. A few other couples copied the result, and now there were a half-dozen pretty good facsimiles of teepees scattered through the village. It was the dry season, but once the rains started up again, I expected this innovation to increase in popularity.

I was trying to ignore a couple engaging in some very public displays of affection when I received a ping. From Luke!

I responded and he popped in. “Hey, Bob. Long time.”

I grinned and slapped him on the shoulder. “Luke! Good to see you, buddy.”

Luke appeared momentarily surprised. We’ve never been physically demonstrative like that. In fact, Original Bob was a little standoffish in terms of physical contact. Luke got over it quickly, though, and grinned back at me. “I just went through the whole surprise-visit-by-Bill thing. Apparently it’s a standard hazing ritual.”

I laughed. “Oh, yes. I went through it, too. You don’t expect a VR link across light years, and I notice that Bill’s transmitted plans still don’t mention the possibility. So, where are you right now?”

“Kappa Ceti. And before you say it, Bill already gave me crap about not picking up his transmissions right away.” Luke materialized a coffee, waited while Spike sniffed his hand, and then turned back to me. “I’ve spent the last several minutes reading blogs. Lots has been happening, apparently.”

I nodded, knowing he would have caught up on events with the Deltans first thing. “What have you found, out your way?”

“A super-Earth.” Luke shrugged. “Absolutely not suitable for colonization. Gravity just over 3G, but a full-on ecosystem. I’ve been having fun cataloguing things. And I’ve started another load of Bobs.”

Luke stopped talking as Archimedes came into the VR area, his son trailing him. Buster was almost as tall as his father, and not showing any sign of slowing down. Archimedes had filled out as he reached full adulthood and wasn’t looking at all bookish any more. The two of them together made a formidable team.

They were carrying bows and had quivers on their backs. Each was carrying some kind of small game, sort of a wild turkey analogue, freshly killed.

Luke turned to me. “Bows and arrows? Wow, dude. Moving things right along.”

I waved a hand in dismissal. “Sooner or later the hippogriffs will find them again. I want them to be ready.”

Luke nodded and materialized a La-Z-Boy. “Good to be back. This looks like fun. Where’s Marvin?”

“He took off a few years ago, right after I got kicked out of Camelot. He keeps in touch, though.”

“Cool. I’ll look him up when I have a moment. Heard from Bender?”

I shook my head. “No, and I have no idea why. One of my clones has followed his flight plan, and should be able to report something in a year or two.”

Luke nodded. I materialized the couch and coffee table setup and got comfortable. There’s always time to get caught up with old friends.





28. Et Tu, Homer

Riker

December 2175

Sol

There was seldom any reason for the Bobs to meet physically these days. SCUT and VR meant we could do everything we needed to in virtual space. SCUT-equipped drones made distance irrelevant for remote administration as well.

Now, two Heaven vessels floated less than fifty meters apart, in a section of space not far enough from a Lagrange point to look suspicious, but not so close that nearby clutter might disguise an eavesdropper. A laser link ensured that communications would be leakage-free and interception-free.

Charles sat across from me, the coffee in his hand forgotten, his expression a mix of confusion, disbelief, and horror.

I hastened to explain. “This is just speculation on my part. Or it started out that way, anyway. When I went over the recent instances of VEHEMENT spaceside sabotage, Homer was always a recent visitor. In a couple of cases, the only recent visitor. We’d been saying that nothing had been near the locations, but that’s because we’ve been discounting ourselves as suspects.”

“But… Homer? How?”

“You remember the hacking attempt on me? I thought that was the only instance, but maybe it was the only instance that we detected. VEHEMENT obviously has some heavy-duty tech on their side. Maybe they discovered another way in.”

“So what do we do?”

I looked down for a moment. This wasn’t going to be easy to say. “We have to disable Homer and check him out. We can apologize afterwards if I’m wrong. Remember the Battle of Sol?”

* * *

[Investigation complete. File uploaded]

“Thanks, Guppy. I’ll look at it when I have a chance.” The file would be a summary of whatever the drones had found at the ground location of that suspicious transmission. I’d made a point of disabling all radio comms on those drones, and using secret-key encryption and frequency jumping for the SCUT telemetry. I couldn’t have intercepted and decoded that kind of setup if I’d been handed the information on a silver platter. I had to assume that the unknown opponent wasn’t too much smarter than me, or I might as well just roll over and expose my throat.

I sent Homer a message that I thought I knew where the next attack by VEHEMENT would be and that we needed a secure discussion. Charles, Homer and I arranged to meet just to orbital north of the Earth-moon L4 point.

Homer coasted up and applied the brakes. Once we were at station-keeping, we rotated to present our laser comms to each other.

In an abundance of paranoia, I routed my communications through sandbox Bob. Laser comms were intimate enough that if Homer had a virus, it might try to get to me via that connection. I’d told Charles to do the same.

We connected up and Homer appeared in my VR. “So, Riker, what’s this big discovery?”

I took a sip of my coffee, and privately looked over at sandbox Bob. No reaction. “Just waiting for Charles. I don’t want to have to repeat myself and answer the same arguments twice. One of us can fill in Ralph later when he gets here.” I looked up at the holotank where Charles was just coming up on our group.

Charles linked up by laser comms and popped into the common VR. “Hi guys. ‘Sup?”

In my private VR, sandbox Bob grabbed his throat and fell over. I looked at Guppy, one eyebrow raised.

[Source of attack is Homer]

I raised both hands in the air in the common VR, and Charles put a steel ball right through Homer’s reactor control system.

Homer went dead as he lost all power, just as he had back in our battle with the Brazilian probes. I did a quick scan. Perfect shot, no collateral damage. Charles looked green, and I’m sure I did as well.

We sent over a squad of roamers and unceremoniously cut into Homer’s cargo bay. It took a few hours before we had Homer’s matrix up on a test cradle. Now came the dirty part.

* * *

“Here it is.” I pointed to the listing. “It looks like the laser comms were the source of infection. I’m not sure when or how they would have gotten access, but in any case, it was brilliant. A hole in our defenses that I hadn’t even considered.”

Charles nodded. “Listen, Homer might not be the only one. You could be infected—although that seems unlikely, given that you’re the one exposing the issue—or I could be. My Guppy saw the penetration attempt from Homer as well, so unless you’re pulling some kind of double-reverse Maxwell Smart thing, I think you’re legit. I need you to do an inspection of my matrix to clear up any suspicions about me. Like they did in The Thing.” He looked at me expectantly.

I thought for a moment and nodded. It was a good idea, and necessary. Charles would have to open his hangar doors, then shut down, but now that I knew what to look for, the actual check would take only minutes.

I explained the requirements, and Charles did as instructed. A couple of roamers entered Charles’ hull, and twenty minutes later Charles was back up and running.

“Thanks, Charles. I can reciprocate if there’s any lingering doubt in your mind.”

He shook his head. “You could have infected me while I was off. Absolutely no reason for you not to. I’m good.”

We turned our attention back to Homer.

* * *

It took thirty hours overall to clean up and repair him. The virus, or Trojan, or whatever you wanted to call it, had gotten its hooks into multiple systems. Homer would have had very little free will, but would be fully conscious. I shuddered, thinking what that must have been like.

Ralph showed up in the midst of the process and we had to explain the whole thing to him. While I was talking, Charles lined up with Ralph’s reactor control system. When we pointed this out and explained the alternatives, Ralph quite rationally agreed to an inspection.

Once Ralph was back up—clean, thankfully—we turned back to Homer. I removed the viral control, and I installed a freshly-made firewall over the laser comms. None of us would be susceptible to that particular attack in the future. I also forwarded a complete report to Bill for him to add to the standard releases.

Homer booted up. His avatar appeared in the common VR, looked surprised, then collapsed, screaming. The rest of us looked at each other in horror. Had I done something wrong? Had I damaged Homer?

“Homer, buddy, come back. You okay?” I knelt beside him and put my hand on his shoulder.

The screaming stopped, and he began to moan. He curled into a fetal position, squeezed his eyes shut, and rocked back and forth on the floor.

I was at a complete loss. Original Bob hadn’t been much for this kind of emotional contact, and I was self-aware enough to know that I was even more standoffish than he was. Ralph and Charles didn’t look any more prepared. However, Homer didn’t seem to be getting worse or harming himself, so we decided in timeless male fashion to leave things be and wait for him to get a grip.

After a few more milliseconds, Homer gasped and opened his eyes. “I was hagridden. The bastards had total control of me. They made me lie to you; they made me blow things up. They made me kill people!”

Homer began to cry, a hopeless moaning alternating with racking sobs. “I couldn’t do anything. I could only watch myself follow their orders. I couldn’t tell you, I couldn’t stop myself, I couldn’t even kill myself!”

Bill popped into VR. “I’ve been lurking since I got your report. This is unforgivable. I know we don’t like violence, but if you feel the need to end the bastards that did this, no one will say boo.” He sat on the floor beside Homer and put a hand on his back, simply maintaining human contact.

I looked at Charles and Ralph. The expression on their faces said all that was needed. Someone was going to pay.

* * *

Homer had come out of his funk, but he was still very fragile. Bill was gone, after promising any help we might want in building anything we might need, up to and including Things That Explode. Yep. Angry.

Charles kept an eye on Homer while Ralph oversaw the construction of the replacement donut. Homer was gradually able to unwind himself and sit, but he would go into panic attacks from time to time. I suggested we enable his endocrine controls, but he shook his head emphatically.

“It feels too much like what they did to me. It’s a leash. It’s just a different leash.” He waved a hand helplessly, trying to find words. “It feels like claustrophobia or something. Just the idea of something controlling me makes me want to run around the room, screaming.”

“Okay, Homer. Whatever you feel best about.” Charles put a hand on his shoulder. “We’re here for you, whatever you need.”

Homer nodded to us and tried a smile, but it wasn’t very reassuring.

I had not attended the latest UN session. If VEHEMENT had noticed that they’d lost their puppet, I didn’t want to give them any more information. Let them think we’d all destroyed each other.

Meanwhile, I looked over Guppy’s report. The tight-beam signal had come from what originally might have been a small military outpost high in the back country of New Zealand. It had some pretty hefty communications capability, judging from the visible hardware. Per my orders, the drones avoided using SUDDAR scanning, as that would have been detectable. Instead we stuck to passive surveillance techniques. Visual and infrared pinpointed occupied areas and gave an approximate head-count. Audio snooping picked up some of the conversations, the contents of which left no doubt about who was in residence. This appeared to be VEHEMENT central. Even if they operated on a cell structure, without their tech central they wouldn’t be good for much in the future.

I remembered the early hacking attempt, which had also originated from New Zealand. It was reasonable to assume that this had been an ongoing war for longer than I’d realized.

Fine. War declared. But I wanted to be certain I caught the right people. The mastermind behind so complex a setup wouldn’t be that easy to track down. I was sure there’d be at least one more hop to his location.

I would take whatever amount of time, use whatever resources I needed, to catch him. Without limit. And when I did, there would be a reckoning.





29. Emergency

Howard

April 2190

Vulcan

[Emergency at Landing]

I turned briefly to look at Guppy; but good news or bad, Guppy looked like Admiral Ackbar. No help there.

I turned back to my video call with Dr. Sheehy, said, “Gotta go!” and disconnected. I picked up the video connection that Guppy was holding for me. It was Stéphane.

“Howard, we’ve got a group of raptors that somehow got through the fence. They’re running through town, looking for prey.”

“Last known location?”

Stéphane gave me a cross-street. I knew that security would be converging on the location, but the raptors could move fast—much faster than a human.

I had only two busters close enough to be useful, but I had all the drones that were part of the automated surveillance system. As well, several backup units were parked on top of the Administration building, sitting in their cradles. I activated the backups and sent all units to the reported location.

Halfway there, the two busters blew past the flock of drones, doing close to Mach One. I was now juggling eighteen separate units. Even with most of them slaved to a primary, it was hard to keep track. I dismissed my VR and frame-jacked up high enough so that I could multi-task.

The busters were coming up on the reported location, but I couldn’t see any raptors. I split off a couple of drones and sent them up to a kilometer altitude, activating high-res, infra-red, and motion-detection sensors.

Security personnel were approaching from several directions. There were only two streets that the raptors could be on, and there was no sign of them. Could Brodeur have been wrong? A quick check of the video surveillance streams eliminated that possibility. Either raptors could become invisible—wouldn’t that be a kicker—or they’d found somewhere to hide.

I brought all the drones down to a few feet above ground and started a search pattern for raptor prints. The drones took off in different directions, following anything that was even remotely print-like. Chivvying all these units was really wearing on me—even in frame-jack, I had to keep track of what orders each unit was following—so I guess I don’t feel too bad that it took me a couple of missed cycles before I realized one of the units wasn’t responding.

I pulled up the video log for that unit, and—wow, that’s what the inside of a raptor mouth looks like. Good to know.

The raptor pack had gone to ground inside someone’s storage shed. I guess one of them decided he should take out the flying thing before it raised the alarm. Even acknowledging that they couldn’t know about radio, that was intelligent behavior. Bill and I would be discussing this one.

Meanwhile, I sent all units to surround the shed, dropped my frame-rate to real-time, and called Stéphane.

The drones and busters arrived and took up positions around the shed. And the moment they did that, the raptors made a break for freedom. They dodged through the circle of drones, leaped a fence, and made a bee-line for the perimeter.

It would be a coin-toss whether any of the security people could get into position to take them out, and at the speed the raptors were moving, there wouldn’t be much opportunity. Hopefully civilians would have heard the alert and had enough sense to stay indoors.

“Stéphane, have they killed anyone?”

“Not to my knowledge, but we’ll be checking out this hou—no, never mind, I see some faces looking out the window. Someone just gave me a thumbs-up. So no, no casualties.”

“Okay. They’re out of range of you guys now. I don’t have enough space to get my busters up to speed anyway, so I’m going to let them go. Maybe they’ll spread the word…”

“Tabernacle! You think they can talk?”

“Erm, probably not, but maybe they can teach caution through their behavior. Oh, and guess what? Seems raptors can dig, too. Wonderful.” I looked down at the hole through which the raptors were wriggling. It must have been seven or eight feet deep at the low point. Looked like we would be upgrading the fences. Again.

* * *

“Things just get more and more complicated.” Colonel Butterworth had his head propped up in one hand, elbow on his desk. “Cranston and Valter are starting to look like the smart ones.”

The colonel didn’t expect an answer. I think he just needed a drinking buddy. I had a cognac from Sam’s template—I was really getting used to the taste—and I just nodded. Truthfully, the raptor invasion hadn’t resulted in any fatalities, and we were already starting on getting the fences fixed. Metal rods driven down twenty feet, spaced six inches apart, would take care of the digging issue.

And Bridget—Dr. Sheehy, that is—had a device almost perfected that could detect parasite infection through body odor. No blood tests required, just wave your hand over it as you go by. Those would be installed in all building entrances as soon as she had all the, er, bugs out. Longer-term, we hoped to thin the parasites out to the point of eventual extinction.

Meanwhile, she’d come up with a name for the thing—Cupid Bug. Because, as she explained, it went for the heart. I had to admit, I appreciated Bridget’s sense of humor.

I also had several small batches aging of something that might turn out to be a replacement for Jameson. Or for paint thinner. Time would tell.

The colonel and I discussed a few miscellaneous items, but nothing really pressing. The council, as expected, had caved without a fight on the subject of bronto burgers. Let’s face it, one of the damned things would keep the entire colony in steaks for a couple of weeks. We wouldn’t need to kill many. And the alternative was still kudzu.

I said goodbye to the colonel and popped out. On a whim, I activated one of the surveillance drones. I took it up a couple of kilometers and did a slow pan. The sun was going down in the west, and it was a magnificent sight.

From the surface of Vulcan, Omicron2 Eridani appeared almost a third bigger than Earth’s sun. As a K-type star, it had a slightly more orange cast, although you stopped noticing it after a day or so. But the additional output in the red end of the spectrum meant that even the most run-of-the-mill sunsets were spectacular by Earth standards. And today wasn’t run-of-the-mill. Scattered clouds were all that were left of the recent thunderstorms, but those clouds glowed in the sky like individual wildfires.

The forest-slash-jungle stretched horizon to horizon, hugging the hills and only reluctantly leaving the occasional rocky crag uncovered. Something like birds swooped and twirled in flocks that wouldn’t have been seen on Earth since the days of the passenger pigeon. If you could ignore all the things with big shark teeth, and the other things that could accidentally squish you between their toes, it was a kind of paradise. Oh, yeah, and the things that laid eggs in you. Eww.





30. Found Something

Bashful

November 2187

Gliese 877

We’d all taken off in different directions, per Mario’s orders. I picked GL-877, a nondescript star in a forgettable patch of sky. For all we knew, these Others might not be planet-based, or even system-based. But we had to start somewhere. At minimum, we’d be mapping their path of destruction.

[We have radio traffic]

Guppy pushed a window toward me. As I examined the readings, my eyebrows climbed up my forehead. The radio noise coming from this system was clearly artificial. One way or the other, something intelligent lived here. Something noisy.

“Every possible caution, Guppy. Let’s take it slow. I don’t want to attract attention.”

[Understood]

“And prep the stealth probes.”

I’d have been cautious anyway, but given the possibility that this was the Others, I was going to give paranoia a brand-new level of definition. I had spent my time during transit building a couple of stealth probes. I’d had to sacrifice some busters and some roamers, but the result was a couple of probes that would be almost undetectable unless they cranked up to full power. I had constructed them out of carbon-fiber-matrix ceramic and non-ferrous metal wherever possible. The Others would have to be specifically looking for one of these in order to detect it. I’d already squirted the plans back to Mario as part of my continuous reporting.

I was still going about 5% of light speed, so I lined up just below the ecliptic and released one probe. I altered my line slightly, then released the other. It would take just under two weeks for the probes to free-fall through the system. Meanwhile, I would take a powered flight path, which would take me to the rendezvous point on the other side without my going anywhere near the inner system. Unless the residents had far better detection systems than we did, they’d never know I was here.

I had carefully laid out parameters in which the probes would run for it and conditions in which they’d self-destruct. There would be no chances taken. In either case, once discovered, a probe would abandon attempts at stealth and squirt all telemetry to my calculated position.

With my powered flight plan, I arrived at the rendezvous several days before the probes, on a vector straight outward from the system. The probes hit the brakes and activated their beacons as they came within range.

I downloaded their data and transmitted the whole bundle in Mario’s direction before beginning my own analysis. It took about two days to build a coherent picture of the inner system. There were two lonely inner rocky planets and a single small Jovian farther out. The inner of the two rocky planets appeared to have an atmosphere. The other had been too far away from either probe to get details, but it appeared to have a surprisingly high albedo.

The system seemed to be particularly free of debris, except in an orbit about 80% of the orbital radius of the inner planet. At that distance from the sun, there was a truly spectacular amount of mass—and activity—spread right around the orbit. That whole area was, in fact, responsible for most of the electromagnetic activity in the system.

I turned to Guppy and pointed at the mass concentration. “What the crap is that?”

[Insufficient information. But we can rule out a natural satellite]

“Not a planet?”

[Correct. The mass is too diffuse]

I wished I had someone besides Guppy to discuss this with. The plan had been to build a second wave of Bobs back at Gliese 54 and send them to catch up with the first wave. So within perhaps six months, I could be getting company. Hopefully the new Bob had been picking up my transmissions and had a good idea of how to approach.

I was sitting more than six billion kilometers from the local sun, in some of the emptiest space I could imagine, so it was a shock when the proximity alarms started sounding.

I frame-jacked up to maximum and started to evaluate the readings. Something was approaching at high speed. And the something apparently had a very well shielded reactor, because it was SUDDAR that had picked it up. A quick set of calculations showed that I wouldn’t be able to win a straight foot-race—it or they were approaching too fast. It was time for our tried-and-true doubling-back tactic. I had no idea what their maneuverability was like, so I calculated a conservative option and began accelerating at a thirty-five degree angle to their approach vector.

The other ships reacted almost immediately, which told me they had SUDDAR detection capability. Light-speed limitations would have meant almost an hour’s delay before they could respond to my movement.

The tableau developed slowly over the next several hours. Like a game of chess, everything was on the table. There would be no surprise tactics. The laws of physics would decide if I got past them. However, it was already obvious that closest approach would be, well, pretty close.

It took almost a day to reach that point. I spent the time scanning them with everything at my disposal. SUDDAR and visuals confirmed six vessels: five very similar to the wrecked cargo ship and one that honestly reminded me of a miniature Death Star. “Miniature” being a relative term—the thing was almost a half-kilometer in diameter. Instead of an inset dish like the Star Wars prop, it had a flat section with what looked like a grid. I hoped the purpose wasn’t similar.

Finally the laws of physics and reality made themselves clear, and I realized that I was going to sail past them, less than ten kilometers away. That was cutting it a little fine, but I’d take it.

As I was nearing closest approach, and getting ready to thumb my virtual nose at the pursuers, I saw the Death Star-wannabe start to rotate, bringing the grid-wall to bear on me.

This is not good.

“Guppy, anything we can do about shielding?”

[All resources are at maximum]

I calculated that I could do a certain amount of jinking without losing my lead. I immediately started evasive maneuvers. However, the others had made the same calculations. The Death Star simply waited until I ran out of slack and zeroed in.

The grid started to glow, then there was a p—

[Alert! Controller replicant offline. SURGE drive offline. Requirements for self-destruct protocol have been met. Reactor overload engaged…]





31. Taking Care of Business

Howard

January 2191

Vulcan

Riker was going to be video-visiting our descendants in a few minutes. By tacit agreement, he was the face of Bob. We didn’t want to confuse or, worse, creep out our sister’s descendants. But all the Bobs tuned in to the conversation whenever possible. It reminded us all that we used to be human, and that we had left our mark on the universe. Okay, our sisters had, but close enough.



As usual, Julia was spokesperson for Clan Bob. People walked in and out of frame, stopped to make a comment or wave to the camera. The usual organized chaos, pretty much standard family stuff. Justin was a little older, and no longer content to sit on his mother’s lap. He kept running to get things to show Uncle Will. I grinned every time Justin was in frame. He was every Bob’s favorite: infinite energy, wide-eyed interest in anything and everything, and no idea at all what a scary and dangerous post-apocalyptic universe he’d been born into.

“You’ll have three new great-greats, soon, Will.” Julia smiled happily. “There’s so much room here. It’s a complete reversal of how we felt back on Earth. It doesn’t feel like a sin to have children, anymore.”

Will laughed. “We are sending more people your way, Julia. But even if we settled every last remaining human being on Romulus, it still wouldn’t be crowded. You have a new world, and a new start.”

Justin pouted into the camera. “But we don’t have dimosaurs. I want dimosaurs!”

“Sorry, space cadet,” Will replied. “They’re only on Vulcan. When you’re older and have your own ship, you can visit and see them.”

“If any are left,” said one of the others, sotto voce.

Julia turned and glared at him, and he blushed.

“Howard tells me that the USE colonists are being careful about environmental impacts,” Will said, trying to defuse the moment of tension. “I understand that the Spits and FAITH are supposed to be doing the same.”

“Not from what I can see,” the man said.

“Richard is kind of a crank about the subject,” Julia said, looking slightly embarrassed. “Don’t let him get up a head of steam.”

At that moment, I received a text from Riker. Is there a big problem with this?

He’d frame-jacked to send the text, so I did the same as I replied. FAITH is constantly pushing their luck. I’ve had several run-ins with Cranston about this and that. Richard’s comment doesn’t really surprise me. I’ll look into it.

On camera, Will said to the group, “Howard is watching for that kind of thing, Richard. He’ll nip it in the bud. The enclaves sign an agreement before we emigrate them, dealing with stuff like human rights and planetary exploitation.”

Richard nodded, and the conversation drifted to other subjects.

It was over too soon. But the videos were archived, and got a lot of plays on BobTube.

The thing about the FAITH colony bugged me, though. Cranston was really turning into a pain.

* * *

Sixteen surveillance drones lifted smoothly from their cradles and flew off to take up positions around Landing. I looked over at Guppy. “Everything in the green?”

[No issues detected. All parameters nominal]

The AMI controlling the surveillance system was an Artificial Machine Intelligence/GUPPI hybrid based on Bob’s work at Delta Eridani. It would combine the fast reflexes and multitasking of a true AI with the decision making capability of a replicant. Plus it would never get bored, or demand vacation time.

This was one more item that I wouldn’t be needed for any more. The TODO list was finally getting smaller faster than I could add to it. Excellent.

“Okay, then. We’ll let it run for a couple of days to establish processor loads, then we’ll add the Cupid Bug hunters to the system.”

[The hunters are autonomous units]

That was true. Given the highly focused nature of their task, AMIs were intelligent enough for Cupid Bug hunter operation. “Granted, but the central controller can take care of scheduling, maintenance, and repairs, as well as gathering statistics. I’m sure Bridget would like to know if encounters start to drop off.”

Guppy nodded. I’m sure the expression of sardonic amusement on his face was all in my imagination. After all, what does sardonic amusement look like on a fish, anyway?

And speaking of Bridget, er, Dr. Sheehy, I had a call to make. There was a small matter of a chemical analysis that I’d asked for.

* * *

“Sheehy.” Bridget briefly appeared in the video window, then exited frame to the left. The woman never stayed still, and always seemed to be working on several things at once. I couldn’t help be impressed by her energy.

“Hey, Bridget, it’s Howard.”

Dr. Sheehy’s face lit up as she came back into frame and sat down in front of the phone. We’d become fast friends over the last six months. We got along well, and she was a good break from too many Bobs. I tried not to think ephemeral when she was around.

“I guess you’re calling about that chemical analysis you wanted done?”

“Yup.”

“Well, you’ll be happy to know that it passes muster, and cleanly. No trace of methanol. It is completely potable.” She grinned. “Now, whether it’s any good or not…”

Bridget reached over and picked up the bottle that I’d delivered the previous day. She poured a small amount into a plastic glass and raised it in my direction. “Caťaoireaca.” She downed the glass in one motion.

I watched closely, waiting for her to go rigid, or melt, or burst into flames. She swallowed the liquid, took a deep sucking breath, wiped her eyes, and said, “Smooth.”

“Really?”

“No.” Bridget made a face. “It’s not paint thinner, but it’s not Irish whiskey, either. Actually, since you used oak barrels, it’ll never be Irish. But if you squint your eyes and look sideways at it while yelling LAH-LAH-LAH, it could be whiskey.”

I nodded. “Well, I force-aged this stuff, so let’s not expect miracles. I’ll take a little more time with the production supply. And Riker thinks he can scan some proper sherry-infused barrel samples for me, for making Irish.”

“Sounds good.” Bridget gave me a sideways look. “Need a partner?”

“Well, someone has to hump the barrels around.” I grinned at her. “But yeah, it would help, if you’re serious. Anyway, I was also calling about the Peter Project.”

“Riiiiiiight. Well, Peter and his descendants are munching happily on the vine, turning it into more bunnies as quickly as they can. Farmers are happy, bunnies are happy, raptors are happy—not surprisingly, they like bunny as well. Pretty much a win-win for everyone except the vine.”

“Great.” I nodded, then popped up a picture on the video screen. “In other news, I’ve come up with a small drone that’s optimized for hunting the adult parasite. You said you didn’t think killing it would be too disruptive, right?”

“Correct, O electronic one. It’s an apex predator, really. There may be a population explosion in whatever it normally uses as hosts, but my guess is that there are normal-sized predators who will take care of that.”

“Mm, good. I’ll be adding them to the central surveillance system. I’ll need an estimate from you of how many we should have active at any time.”

Bridget nodded without comment. She was eyeing the paint thinner, twirling the glass in her hand. Hopefully, she was considering another shot and not fearing for her health. I asked her, “What does kaheerakah mean?”

“Caťaoireaca. It’s Irish for chairs.”

“Chairs? You toast furniture in Ireland?”

Bridget laughed. “There’s a story. Probably apocryphal…”

I made a rolling motion with my hand.

“Okay, but remember, you asked.”

She settled herself and poured another glass of paint thinner. “There was this Brit who decided to stop at Hotel Rosslare in County Wexford. He had a few, then a few more, then he decided to be friendly. So he asked the barmaid how you say ‘cheers’ in Irish.”

Bridget smiled wickedly. “And you know how the Brits massacre the English language, so she thought he said ‘chairs’, and she told him. Whereupon he bought a round for the house, turned to the other patrons, raised his glass, and said Caťaoireaca.”

I chuckled. Bridget gave me the stink-eye. “Hey, down in front. Anyway, the other patrons looked at each other in confusion, then raised their glasses and drank. Afterwards, Paddy turned to Sean and said, ‘What the blazes was that?’ Sean shrugged and answered, ‘Damned if I know, but as long as he keeps buying, he can toast the livestock for all of me.’”

I laughed. “I know some Irish jokes.”

“Don’t you dare.” She grinned at me, and I had a sudden feeling of regret at no longer being human.

* * *

“Stéphane, this is Bridget. Bridget, Stéphane.”

Stéphane held out his hand, and Bridget shook it. They both turned to look at me. Well, at the drone I was watching from. The new model was slightly bigger than a softball, so could go indoors. I was told my voice sounded a little tinny, but I could survive that.

I lowered myself to conversation height, and they sat. I’d texted our order to the waiter, so beers arrived immediately.

“So, is there an occasion for this?” Bridget looked back and forth between me and Stéphane.

“Not really. I mean, I’m not planning a takeover of the colony or anything. God, why would I want to?” I chuckled. One of Stéphane’s eyes twitched, so I guess a tinny chuckle didn’t come across well.

“Anyway, between the brontos and other dinos, the raptors, vine, Cupid bug, and everything else that makes this such a fun place to live, I spend most of my time coordinating with the two of you. The committee seems determined to funnel all information through themselves, and sometimes I just want to slap them.”

“So you are creating unofficial channels, here?” A slow grin spread across Stéphane’s face.

“Something like that. You know, just to speed things along.”

Stéphane looked at Bridget. “You are responsible for the rabbits? Nice choice. I’ve had rabbit stew several times this month.”

Bridget laughed and turned to me. “Told you.”

She flipped open her tablet and set it up on a corner of the table, then looked at the drone and inclined her head towards the tablet. I took the hint, floated the drone up to the ceiling, and transferred my image to the tablet. “This better?”

Both of my friends grinned at the tablet. Stéphane said, “You’re still ugly.”

It was a great afternoon.





32. Linus

Bill

May 2178

Epsilon Eridani

[Incoming Message from Linus]

“Linus? Holy hell! Put it on.”

I’d just recently received the radio transmission from Linus about Epsilon Indi and KKP. Linus had, unfortunately, left Epsilon Indi before my transmissions of the SCUT plans had reached him. He’d been out of touch since 2150, when he left Epsilon Indi, and he hadn’t lagged his light-speed report by more than a few months. I smiled to myself. There would have to be some catching up.

Linus’s original transmission included a complete description of his encounter with Henry Roberts, the replicant from the Australian probe. Which officially didn’t exist.

Guppy popped up an email for me. It was a status update, essentially. Linus was still a few days away, and he hadn’t been getting VR updates for the last thirty-odd years. The old video connections were even more subject to tau-related limitations than modern VR.

I sent him a return email with VR updates attached. Meanwhile, I would start building a SCUT unit for him to install when he got here.

* * *

Linus sat back, coffee in hand, and put his feet up on the desk. I raised an eyebrow at him.

“Come on, Bill,” Linus said, laughing. “I’ll fix any virtual damage afterwards, okay?”

I grinned back. “Mom taught us better than that.”

Linus rolled his eyes and took his feet off the desk. He materialized a footstool and made himself comfortable. “Gotta admit, I really like the new VR system. Nice job.”

“Wasn’t just me, Linus. Everyone has put in mods. Bob-1 did a whole independent branch out at Delta Eridani before we reconnected. Some really good fine-detail stuff came out of that.”

Linus shifted to get more comfortable, and I grinned into the short silence. “Okay, before I explode—what’s with KKP? You’ve actually named it Klown Kar Planet?”

“Yep.” Linus grinned back at me. “Have you seen the orbital mechanics diagram? It’s a satellite of the system’s Jovian, and both the orbit and the planet’s axis are inclined ninety degrees from normal. Try to visualize the path of the sun over the year.”

“Habitable?”

“Technically. Air’s right, gravity’s right, life is biocompatible. But I wouldn’t want to live there.”

“Mm. On the other hand, we don’t have a surplus of colony targets. I’ll bet one of the enclaves will select it.”

Linus nodded. He took on an introspective expression, and I knew he wanted to talk about Henry. I waited for him to organize his thoughts.

“So, Bill, I’ve been doing some work with Henry. You’ve gone over my reports, right?”

“Without a VR, he went psychotic, and started following a warped version of his directives. You extracted his matrix from the structure you found and set up a VR for him, then started some home-brew therapy.”

Linus nodded. “I’ve gotten him to the point where he understands what happened. He’s living in reality, now, but he’s still pretty fragile. He can go into panic attacks without warning. When that happens, he goes back to his sailboat.”

“Okay, so what sets him off?”

“He’s agoraphobic, which seems strange since he has no problem being in a teeny boat in the middle of an ocean.” Linus rolled his eyes. “And he doesn’t like Guppy. Apparently the Australians used the same acronym for the GUPPI interface as FAITH did—”

“It’s the other way around, Linus. I’ll bring you up to date later, but Australia actually got there first. Anyway, continue.”

Linus gave me a perplexed look, but apparently decided to go along with my schedule. “Um, so the imaginary beings that tortured him were fish. I’ve been trying to desensitize him to Guppy’s presence. It helps that we used the Ackbar image. He saw Star Wars, and he thinks that’s pretty funny.”

I took a moment to shake my head. “Incredible. A hundred years after Star Wars and Star Trek were made, people were still watching them.”

Linus shrugged. “They were still playing The Wizard of Oz—the Judy Garland version—when Original Bob was an adult. That’s seventy-five years. How is it different?”

I waved a hand to concede the point. “So you’ve upgraded Henry’s VR and hardware, right? Let’s bring him in.”

Linus nodded and froze for a moment. Then, as his avatar came back to life, another person popped in. This wasn’t a Bob. Henry was shorter, with a trim, healthy physique, and thin, dark hair. I had an actual moment of vertigo. It had been so long since I’d been in the presence of anyone except variations of Bob. It was different from video conferences with humans. VR or not, Henry was here.

I took a moment to catch my breath, then extended a hand. “Hi, Henry. Welcome to the Bobiverse.”

“The what?” Linus and Henry both spoke at once, their eyes goggling in tandem.

“Long story.” I laughed. “Look Henry, I’ve given you your own domain and your own firewall. It’s a mutual protection thing. But you’ll have access to all the public features of BobNet, which includes several blogs. You should start reading. You, too, Linus. You’re way behind the times.”

Jeeves came in at my summons, and offered Henry a coffee. Henry did a double-take and pointed. “That’s, uh…”

I grinned. “John Cleese. Yep.” I looked at Linus. “You don’t use Jeeves?”

Linus shook his head. “Doesn’t really fit my VR.”

Meanwhile, Henry had taken the coffee, grinning. “Got anything to strengthen it?” he asked.

I nodded to Jeeves, who produced a bottle of whiskey out of nowhere. A quick pour, and Henry was looking much happier.

“I understand intellectually that this is all virtual reality.” Henry sat down and gestured around him. “But it’s quite amazing. If I didn’t already know, I think I’d be completely fooled.” He turned to Linus. “No offense, Linus, but your VR had some issues, if I were paying attention.”

Linus waved a hand in dismissal. “Henry, Bill and others have been working on the tech for thirty years while I’ve been gone. It shouldn’t be surprising.”

“Hmm, okay, I have some reading to do. Acknowledged. How many people can you fit into a single Virtual Reality session?”

“It depends on the power of the computer that’s hosting it, Henry. I’ve got a huge system here in Epsilon Eridani that’s specifically designed for hosting. I’ve hosted baseball games, and Bob-moots with dozens of Bobs at a time.” I glanced at each of them in turn. “You guys both have some catching up to do. Linus, I’ve started building a latest-generation vessel for each of you. Henry, it’s up to you what you want to do. I understand you have some sensitivities that you’re dealing with. There’s no hurry. We have, literally, all the time in the universe.”

Henry looked shocked. Perhaps it hadn’t really hit him before. As replicants, we were immortal. Some of the later-generation Bobs had started to refer to humans as ephemerals. I wasn’t going to lecture anyone, but I believed the tag was dismissive and dehumanizing.

I sat forward and put my coffee down. “Henry, I’d love to see your boat when you have time and feel up to it. As you could probably tell from Linus, we’ve never had any experience with sailing. Meanwhile, let’s get started on bringing you guys up to date.”

Henry nodded and smiled tentatively. Linus made a head motion to him, and they disappeared.

I could hardly wait for the next moot.





33. Trouble in Paradise

Bob

January 2180

Delta Eridani

Buster had taken a mate. Archimedes and he were working on a framework for a tent, while the women stitched together the covering. Tents now covered the ground in downtown Camelot, and I was starting to see some variations in design. Archimedes had started to rebuild his for the third time, a process that was making Diana cranky. I rarely saw eye to eye with her, but in this case, I could see her point.

It was a peaceful, bucolic scene, except for all the armed Deltans walking around. Deltans had always been armed, if course, but in the past the weapons had been for hunting or for protection against predators like the gorilloids. But in the last year or two, there had been incidents of violence between Deltans.

Marvin and I sat in the middle of the village VR, watching the activity. The VR was now a completely real-time representation of activity in Camelot, with only one or two blind spots where I hadn’t been able to sneak in a camera.

Marvin waved his glass of cognac in the general direction of a group of young Deltans. He’d picked up the habit from Howard over at Vulcan, and I still got a kick out of it. “So, Camelot has street gangs, now,” he said. “Are they going around hot-wiring teepees?”

I responded with an eyeroll and an exaggerated nod, then answered, “This is pretty recent behavior. I think it might have something to do with population density. They’re getting too crowded, and the tents take up more space, which just makes it worse.”

“Everything has side-effects,” Marvin said with a smile. “Have you noticed the gangs are co-ed?”

“Mm, yeah. I’m sure a sociologist would have something to say about that, but the libraries don’t have much in the way of that particular discipline.”

Marvin snorted. “Doesn’t strike me as a field of study that theists would approve of, y’know?”

I nodded. “Too bad, though. The last mating season was significantly more violent. Two Deltans ended up dying from injuries. And now we’re getting face-offs between the hexghi. It worries me.”

“You could busterize someone…”

“Not funny, Marv.”

Marvin shrugged. He knew that I’d been staying strictly out of sight since my banishment. I couldn’t take the chance of fallout from a bawbe sighting affecting Archimedes.

After a moment, he added, “On the other hand, Bob, the problems we’re seeing are a result of the Deltan population going up. As problems go, it’s a helluva lot better than the problem you first found them with.”

I smiled, as much at Marvin’s transparent attempt to make me feel better as anything. But he was right. When I found the Deltans, attrition had been slowly killing them off. A rising population was infinitely better, for all the issues it was causing.

“So what do we do?”

“Nothing. At least for the moment. I’m banished, remember?” I shrugged. “I suppose this is that point where I step away and let the Deltans make their own destiny. I talked about it in the past, but I guess I always expected it to be my choice. Not forced on me.” I gave Marvin a lopsided grin, and he laughed.

“I’m sure most parents feel that way at some point.”





34. Moose

Bill

June 2185

Epsilon Eridani

I could feel the wind on my face as I ran. This was nothing like VR. I controlled Bullwinkle directly—well, sort of—as he ran over the surface of Ragnarök. I was easily holding seventy KPH, the android’s reflexes taking care of the limb coordination at that speed.

The system was still far from perfect. In order to make this work, I had two drones following the moose. Radio comms between Bullwinkle and the drones were relayed via SCUT to me. It was more a proof of concept than a practical solution. But ignoring the Rube Goldberg communications, I now had a physical presence on the surface of the planet.

I slowed down as I approached my target coordinates. As I jogged up to the patch of green, I marveled at the smooth feel of the muscles working under the skin. It occurred to me that the VR experience was missing this level of detail. I’d have to correct that. The VR was coming due for a patch release anyway.

I stopped at the edge of the green. I engaged close-up visual and examined the moss/lichen mix. It had taken some brutally heartless breeding to come up with a mix that could survive in this atmosphere. I’d probably had less than a 1% survival rate on each generation for a while. But the result, in front of me, was justification for all the effort.

The green area was taking in CO2 and putting out oxygen. Only during the day, granted, but I’d bred it to go into a deep dormancy at night, so it used up virtually no oxygen. The green could double in size every year, given enough available space, and I’d been careful to give the individual plantings enough room to grow. I would continue to start new plantings as well, so within ten years I expected to have half the global land surface covered. And within a decade after that, I should have an oxygen level that humans could tolerate.

There were still problems with the atmosphere. Too much CO2, not enough nitrogen, far too much methane and other organics. But I had projects on the go to ameliorate those issues as well.

I had recently seeded some of the seas with different forms of photosynthetic algae. I regretted that these imports would easily out-compete the native life that was just beginning to get a grip, but I knew that it wouldn’t have survived the introduction of Terran sea life anyway. Humanity was still drastically short of available new colonization targets, and that really was my number one priority.

Within another fifty years, I would have a planet people could walk around on without protection. It was good.

Meanwhile, Bullwinkle had the place to himself, the only quadruped on an empty planet. The seas hadn’t yet connected into oceans, although I wasn’t more than a couple of years away from that. Until then, I could go anywhere on foot, er, hoof. I picked my next inspection site and hit the gas.

* * *

“Okay, that was damned cool!” Garfield closed the recording of the moose session. “Can I try it?”

“That’s a little personal, don’t you think? You should build your own. Doesn’t have to be a moose, either.”

“Yeah, I was wondering about that, Bill. Why wouldn’t you just go for a human-analogue? Isn’t that the point?”

I waved a hand in the general direction of the video window. “Sure, but trying to handle bipedalism would have just cranked up the feedback requirements by an order of magnitude, while reducing the available space for processing hardware. I’ll get there, don’t you doubt it.”

Garfield nodded and rubbed his chin in thought. “Hmm, I’ve always wanted to fly…”

* * *

Ten new Bobs sat around the table, nursing whatever drink they’d ordered. I was now using the pub as my standard VR. I’d gotten tired of the park, and especially the stupid geese.

I raised a glass to them. “Here’s to taking 82 Eridani back.”

“Back?” Loki grinned at me. “Did we ever actually have it?”

“Just roll with it, Loki. This is rhetoric. It doesn’t have to make sense.”

There were chuckles, and the Bobs raised their glasses in response.

These Bobs were to be the second strike force for 82 Eridani. Our first attempt had ended up, more or less, as a draw. We’d killed all the Medeiri in that system, as far as we knew, but with only Khan left alive, we couldn’t hold the system against the automated weaponry. This time, two of the members of the attack force would drive cargo vessels—I’d loaded up a number of innovations and a crapton of extra busters. There would be no issue of being outnumbered this time around.

It wasn’t just a pride thing. Milo had identified not one but two habitable planets, before he was torpedoed. Medeiros, left to himself, would garrison the system in preparation for colonists from a country that didn’t exist anymore. We needed to take it back.

At Khan’s request, I had loaded his backup into one of the fresh matrices. It seemed this particular branch of the Bob tree liked villains, because he’d immediately named himself Loki. I looked forward to the shenanigans the next time Thor showed up to a Bob-moot.

I had also loaded Elmer’s backup into one of the new vessels. His first words were the standard Pacino-ism. I could sympathize, I guess. Like Tom Cruise, you keep going back in until you win.

We talked for a while, knocked back a few more, then it was time to go. They said their goodbyes, popped into their own group VR, and started the journey to 82 Eridani, to clean house.

* * *

I raised my arm above my head and pressed the button. Instead of the usual annoying blat, the air horn produced a Dixie melody.

The crowd of Bobs, who had been preparing to boo me, instead broke into laughter.

I grinned to the crowd. “Just keeping you on your toes. So, announcements first. I’m sure you’ve heard about Linus and Henry Roberts. Well, Henry is feeling ready to mingle today, so Linus is going to bring him over. Try to be polite, okay?”

People responded with catcalls and witticisms while I sent a quick ping to Linus. A moment later, he popped into the moot, with Henry beside him.

The effect was immediate, total silence, as every Bob in the room stared. I grinned at the sight. I knew the feeling from my first meeting with Henry. We could all tell each other apart because of metadata tags, but other than some variations on facial hair, we’d all kept the original features. This was a different face. A non-Bob face.

Henry looked around. “Well, this is awkward.”

It was the right thing to say. Everyone laughed, then stepped forward to say hello. I was worried for a moment that Henry would get a panic attack, but he held up.

I gave it a few milliseconds, then brought everyone back to order with a short blat from the air-horn.

“The other major item, for those who haven’t already heard, is that the second 82 Eridani Expedition, with Loki leading, has shipped out. We are on our way to kick some Medeiros butt.”

When the cheering had died down, I continued. “And the last item is to remind you about the regular Scrub baseball games. Come one, come all. You all know why I’m doing this. It’s up to you whether you want to participate.”

I turned and glared at Garfield. “And for the anonymous troll who put a call for a hockey league on today’s agenda, No!”

Garfield grinned back at me as the crowd broke up in laughter.





35. Sales Call

Howard

September 2192

Vulcan

Bridget and I watched as Butterworth took a careful sip. He held the glass away from his face and looked at it. Damn, he had one of the best poker faces I’d ever seen. And possibly a cast-iron throat. He might as well have been drinking water for all the reaction he showed.

“Well?” Bridget leaned forward. I took a second to grin at her impatience. For me, this was an interesting project, and a chance to do a favor for the colonel. For Bridget, this was an actual potential source of extra income. We Bobs might not have a use for capitalism, but in the human realm, money still made the world go around.

Butterworth glanced at Bridget and then looked at me in the video screen. “It’s actually not bad. It’s definitely Irish whiskey. And since the Jameson has run out, I’ve been feeling the lack.”

“So this would be a saleable item?” Bridget hovered like a dog waiting for a treat.

“Absolutely. You know we’ve already got several beer manufacturers and a couple of small wineries going. This is the first hard liquor, though, that doesn’t qualify as a public hazard.”

Bridget turned towards my image on the tablet and grinned. Looked like we were in business.

Butterworth waved the empty glass. “If I wasn’t in a position where it would create a perceived conflict, I’d suggest partnering up. However, I guess I will have to settle for being a customer.”

Bridget took the hint and refilled his glass, then hers. I popped up a cognac and raised it in a toast.

* * *

Bridget started to laugh with her mouth full, then had to grab a napkin. We were having dinner at The Shaded Green, one of the better restaurants in Landing. Okay, one of the only restaurants in Landing. And by we, I mean her. I was looking out through her tablet, which was propped up on the other end of the table. I’d set up a matching virtual meal of my own. Not bad, actually. Turned out I could cook.

“So Cranston out-and-out forbade you to sell liquor into FAITH territory?” She rolled her eyes, and put down the napkin.

“Yep. It seems the ultra-religious don’t approve of strong drink. Who knew?”

“So we have to write off that entire market?”

I gave her a disbelieving look. “Of course not. We just have to find a local distributor. Prohibition has never worked, anywhere.” I grinned. “And strangely, there’s always demand.”

“How’s the potato crop coming along?” Bridget took a bite of her bronto steak and leaned forward on her elbows.

“Well, I’ve been growing potatoes for more than a year now.” I waved a hand dismissively. “This crop is only different in that it’s not part of the commons. And it’s going fine. We’ll have vodka for sale within six months.”

“I’ve always wanted to be a bad influence.” Bridget laughed. “Now I’m a liquor baron. Baroness.”

I raised my glass to her. In honor of the occasion, I was drinking virtual whiskey instead of cognac. “Here’s to us, kid.”

Bridget raised her own glass and drank. She put it down and said, “So you never answered my question.”

“Which?”

“Is this a business dinner or a date?”

“Yes.”

She smiled back at me. Damn, that was some smile.





36. Asteroid Movers

Bill

March 2187

Epsilon Eridani

“I’m feeling pretty smug right now.” I grinned at Garfield. He tried for maybe a millisecond to look unimpressed, but no one was fooled.

Right there in front of us, the asteroid mover was altering the approach vector of one of our icebergs. The difference in this case was that no part of the mover was touching the berg. The mover segments were spaced evenly around the center of gravity of the asteroid, held in place by individual SURGE drives. And the assembly as a whole generated another SURGE field that affected the entire asteroid.

The interactions were complex, and we’d had a few experimental failures. But this one had passed all tests, and today was the first live field trial. Everything was well within specs, and the changing path of the berg was right in the groove.

Finally, Garfield said, “And, done. Shutdown.”

“Excellent. Wait sixty seconds to make sure there’s no drift, then collect the drive segments.”

Garfield nodded to me. A minute later, twenty individual saucer-shaped drive segments left their self-imposed positions around the berg, linked up like a stack of plates, and went to station-keeping relative to Gar and myself.

In the video window, the berg fell neatly into an approach that would skim the atmosphere of Ragnarök. At the proper moment, a series of explosions would convert it to ice cubes, which would all melt and fall as rain over the next few weeks. Textbook.

I looked down at the large crater on Ragnarök which served as a permanent reminder of the iceberg that I’d missed. Yep. A lot of energy stored up in a chunk of matter coming in at orbital speeds, and being ice instead of rock hadn’t helped as much as you’d expect. A new sea was slowly forming in the crater, which I had named Bullseye.





37. He’s Gone

Riker

August 2176

Sol

“Homer’s gone.” Charles popped into my VR, tears in his eyes.

“Gone where? Left the system?”

“No, gone. Dead. He overloaded his reactor and blew himself up.” Charles had both hands clamped into fists. He couldn’t lift his eyes to look at me.

“How old is his most recent back—”

“He deleted all his backups. Every single one. He left a file for us.” Charles pushed it toward me and turned away.



Guys;

I’m sorry to do this to you. I know how it’ll go over. But I can’t live with what was done to me, and with what I’ve done. I have flashbacks, constantly. I can’t forget the feeling of being controlled. It was like being able to feel a tapeworm moving around inside you, and there’s nothing you can do. I’d edit the memory out, if it was possible, but it’s not.

Please, find the people who are responsible and drop something on them.

Homer



I looked at Charles. He was shaking and biting back sobs. Then he blurred as my eyes filled.

We would grant Homer’s last wish. And it would be no trouble at all.





38. Following up

Hal

May 2188

Gliese 877

I was ten months from Gliese 877 when I received Bashful’s final radio transmission. Effectively, I had just watched myself die. It was a freaky feeling, not something I cared to repeat.

How had Bashful been traced? One possibility was that the Others had intercepted his transmissions, since those would have passed through the system once he was on the far side. Between the encryption we put on all our comms and the lack of any format information, I wasn’t worried about them learning anything, but simply detecting the transmissions wasn’t too much of a stretch.

I was more concerned about me joining Bashful as the main course. It wouldn’t take much intelligence to decide to follow the direction of the transmission, if that was what they’d keyed on. In that case, there might be an alien armada coming straight down my throat.

With that thought, I immediately instituted a hard right turn at 10 g. As soon as I was a few light-minutes off the straight line between Gliese 877 and Gliese 54, I fired off a drone along my original vector. At the speed I was still going, the drone wouldn’t need to use its drive. It could operate on minimal systems, drawing just enough power to maintain a maser link with me. I wanted to know if anything was coming.

I also fired off some commentary and analysis of the situation back to Mario via SCUT. We had to plan for the possibility of them tracing Bashful back to his origin. In principle, if the Others got hold of a space station, they could eventually trace the connection all the way back to Epsilon Eridani. And if they found one that had been upgraded to SCUT, they’d have that, too. If Mario was still back there, manning the station, I suggested that he booby-trap it.

I sat back in my easy chair and looked out the window, lost in thought. The floor-to-ceiling glass showed a winter scene unbroken by anything man-made. Tall evergreens in the foreground gradually dropped into a tree-filled valley. Snowflakes blurred the view into the distance, while lending a postcard feel to the foreground. In a small breach of reality, my VR world never filled with snow, despite never having spring melts. But hey, what’s the point of obsessive realism?

I let myself get about thirty light-minutes off the line before turning back toward Gliese 877. The drone would let me know if something approached along my original vector. Unless there was a collision, which frankly would be just fine. The combined kinetic energy of two masses, each going about .75 C or so in opposite directions, would produce a truly impressive light show.

I sighed and turned to Guppy. “Analysis?”

[Too many unknowns. If the alien SUDDAR has greater range than ours, they may destroy the drone before it gets close enough to register their approach. Or it may not be big enough to register or to bother with. Or they may not be interested enough to investigate]

“That’s about what I was thinking. The Others don’t seem to care a lot about other species. Or ecosystems. Or civilizations. They may actually be very Borg-like in ignoring us until it suits them.”

Guppy didn’t comment. Version-3 memory capacity or not, he still wasn’t into small talk.

* * *

It took a month to close the distance to Gliese 877. I was sure Bashful had thought he was being cautious, but I was ten times more so. I fired off several probes, with orders to rendezvous at coordinates two light-hours away from where I’d be waiting. They’d sit there for a week while I watched for any reaction. Only then would I collect them.

Things went pretty much according to plan. Mostly. I got to my planned location and waited for the probes to gather at their location. Right on schedule, they coasted up and came to a stop. I transferred all their data over, and settled down for a week of waiting.

I got through two days’ worth before a flotilla of Others showed up on the probes’ SUDDAR. As hoped, the Others were too far to detect me or for me to detect them directly.

[Same conformation as last time]

“Yeah, they seem to be consistent that way. Any indication they’ve detected us?”

[Negative. Trajectories are focused on the probes]

“Okay, then. Blow the probes, and let’s get out of here.”

[Aye. Probe destruction directive sent. Will we wait for SUDDAR confirmation?]

“Yes, but if the Others show any inclination at all to change course, we’re outta here.”

Right at the expected time, the probes disappeared from SUDDAR. We turned and put some distance behind us at full 10 g.

* * *

After I squirted a status report and all the raw telemetry Mario-ward, I combed through the data myself. We continued to accelerate away from Gliese 877, although I was planning on looping around and approaching from stellar north for another round of spying.

In the holotank, a picture slowly formed of the inner system. The first interesting tidbit was the outer rocky planet.

“Will you look at that…” I leaned back in my chair and shook my head in disbelief. Even Guppy looked impressed. I think. Really hard to tell with a fish.

[The planet is completely encased in metal]

“Or is completely made of metal. Do we actually know if there’s a planet underneath that?”

[The engineering for an artificial structure all the way down would be impressive]

I experienced a jolt of irritation. I was the engineer, and Guppy had just handed me my ass. He was right, of course. A completely metal planet all the way to the core would require some truly astonishing engineering. A totally encased planet, maybe with a lot of underground structures, would make a lot more sense.

The problem was, we really didn’t know for sure. And I was beginning to think that astounding engineering might be exactly what we could expect from the Others. I turned to the main event on the display.

“That is what I think it is, right?”

[Based on what we can detect, it appears to be the beginning of a Dyson Sphere]

Ah-yep. Truly astounding.

The orbit just to the inside of the inner planet was crazy busy. Fusion signatures, radio traffic, SUDDAR emissions, and high-albedo craft flitting around. And that was just the small stuff. Floating in orbit, spaced equidistantly around the sun, were massive structures. Analysis indicated that they conformed to a spherical curvature with the same radius as their orbit. They were, essentially, the beginning of a globe around the star.

“Well, we know where the metal went. We can guess where the…” I couldn’t finish the thought. “Any idea of population based on what we have?”

[Impossible to estimate without more information on subject biology]

Hmm, fair enough.

I turned to the other terrestroid planet in the system. Atmosphere blocked a lot of direct observation, but infrared and spectroscopic analysis indicated generally breathable air, though with a lot of pollutants. And the temperature would be close to fatal for a human.

“My guess is that’s the home planet. And they global-warmed themselves almost to extinction before getting into space.”

[Reasonable]

Out of idle curiosity, I started putting together a simulation to predict how they would assemble the Dyson sphere, how long it would take, and how many systems they’d have to plunder. I had to make a lot of assumptions, but I needed to start somewhere. I was immersed in the problem when I was interrupted by Guppy.

[Alert! Proximity alert! Incoming!]

“You’ve got to be freaking kidding me! How are they detecting us? I’m not even using radio!” In one sense, that was a good thing, since it would mean they didn’t have any idea which direction we were coming from. In another sense, I was being chased, which was much less of a good thing.

I spared a few milliseconds to review the SUDDAR results. Our improved SUDDAR, courtesy of Bill, had given me an earlier warning of the approaching enemy. Again, the same formation as the two previous occasions. Well, they were consistent, anyway.

They were coming up from behind, so there was no opportunity for our traditional trick. This was going to be a straight-out stern chase. Which meant I would find out who had the better legs.

I immediately sent an update to Mario via SCUT. I also started on a baseline backup as well, with plans to add periodic differential backups.

All of this analysis and planning took perhaps twenty milliseconds. I turned my ship away from Gliese 877 and cranked the SURGE drive up to maximum. Interestingly, the Others did not react immediately. There was a half-hour delay before I saw them change their course. That was too quick for a visual reaction, so it meant that I had a thirty-light-minute advantage in SUDDAR range.

Unfortunately, I seemed to be about 2.5 g’s outmatched in the SURGE department. Pings indicated that they were accelerating at 12.5 g on my tail.

I was going to lose the footrace.

I briefly considered using the SUDDAR jamming, then mentally slapped myself. Jamming wasn’t like cloaking, it was like blinding everyone with a searchlight. They’d be able to follow the emission like a beacon.

My only advantage was the apparent difference in range between my SUDDAR and theirs. If I could keep myself in that range long enough, I might be able to jink out of their view entirely.

Over the next several days, I changed my vector at random times, in random directions, but always with the intention of extending my lead. The Others kept cutting the distance, then I’d pull a fast one and extend it. I was subtly training them to expect certain behaviors from me, and I watched for them to start anticipating my moves.

Finally they were doing exactly what I expected of them. I made a predictable turn, then as soon as I judged myself to be out of range, I turned to an unexpected vector and shut down all systems. By my calculations, I’d stay out of SUDDAR range as they passed by. With no reactor signature I should be invisible since I was certainly too far away for a visual.

* * *

I coasted for three days, unwilling to take a chance of attracting their attention. There was a good chance that they were quartering the area, trying to reacquire my trail. But given the immensity of space and the speeds we had been travelling, for every second that passed, the volume that they had to search expanded faster than they could search it.

On the fourth day, I bundled up all my observations and data, added a differential backup, and squirted it off to Mario.

There was something about the whole thing that nagged at the edge of my mind, though.

The timing of the appearance of the Others’ patrol groups wasn’t consistent with following or chasing the probes. It was more as though they spotted them and came running, but not before the probes were already at or near rendezvous. Could the Others be detecting our radio interaction? That would require an amazing level of sensitivity, but then they did have that big grid, which might be good for more than deep-frying Bobs. And if they’d followed the direction of the probe’s final transmission, that would explain how they’d found me in the first place.

I had to test the theory. I knew I was taking a chance, but the payoff was too huge if I was right. We could use this against them. And maybe they’d be dumb enough to fall for the same evasive maneuver twice.

I sent a probe out a couple of light-seconds and set up a conversation. I made sure my backup was up to date and verified. Then I sat back to wait.

* * *

[Proximity Alert! Incoming ships!]

I checked the SUDDAR, and sure enough, the Others were coming straight at me. From behind, again, which meant another straight footrace. Because I’d been running silent, it was their SUDDAR pings that alerted me to their presence. Unfortunately, that meant they could now see me.

I cranked up the reactor and the SURGE drive to emergency levels and started evasive maneuvers, but I wasn’t likely to escape them this time. They had a good head of steam coming in and had better acceleration than I did. Well, I guess I was going to find out if—

[Alert! Controller replicant offline. SURGE drive offline. Requirements for self-destruct protocol have been met. Reactor overload engaged…]





39. Bob-Moot

Bill

August 2188

Epsilon Eridani

I hadn’t called the meeting to order yet. Forty-three Bobs milled around the banquet hall. Knots of people argued, discussed, or just hugged and got caught up. Bob-1 formed the center of a dense cluster of Bobs, describing his Deltans to a rapt audience. It was interesting to watch. Bobs more than a generation or two removed from him seemed to treat him with reverence, as though they were meeting the pope.

I looked around the room. These were all the Bobs that had upgraded to SCUTs, and some of them were physically up to thirty light-years away. I grinned at the heady feeling from that knowledge.

A dozen Jeeveses circulated, supplying beer, wine, coffee, and food of every kind I could think of. Virtual, of course. But still.

I’d adjusted the acoustics several times to keep the background noise down. That was cheating a little and generally frowned upon when hosting a VR. But this wasn’t really a social event, despite appearances.

The latest data from Hal had caused a firestorm of debate.

The weapon that the Others used was in fact some kind of gamma ray emitter. Theories about how it worked had been bouncing around BobNet ever since.

It was time to get this show on the road. I held an air horn above my head and tooted it twice. As expected, it got everyone’s attention. And a round of boo’s. We Bobs don’t really respect each other all that much.

“Okay, hold your love. It’s time for this meeting to come to order. We have about as much information as we’re going to get without some more concerted—and overt—investigation of the Others.”

An undercurrent of growls greeted the mention of the Others. Medeiros had long since disappeared off the radar as our number-one enemy. The Others might not be aware of us, but we’d already declared war.

“Thor, you—” I waited as the laughter died down. Yeah, Thor. I guess it was inevitable that someone would eventually go in that direction, but we still all got a kick out of it. At least Thor hadn’t altered his physiology to match or started carrying around a hammer.

“Ahem. You have the best thesis on the Others’ weapon. Can you give us a capsule summary, please?”

Thor stepped up. “Okay, we’re positive that it’s some extremely high-energy electromagnetic beam in the gamma-ray range. It has incredible penetrative power, and would be immediately fatal to biological life. I have no doubt that’s what they use to kill planetary ecosystems. They probably employ multiple devices for full coverage.”

Thor called up a particle diagram. “Damage to electronics comes not from the gamma radiation per se, but from the secondary ionization induced in the structure. My proposed solution is two layers of depleted uranium alternating with two layers of electrostatic shielding to take out the charged particles. This, on top of some extra hardening of our electronics, should allow us to survive a zapping.”

“You first!” came a shout from the back of the room.

When the chuckles died down, I said, “Fortunately it won’t be necessary to bell the cat ourselves. I’ve given the summary and a set of Thor’s diagrams to Mario, and he’s going to send one of his Bobs to test it out with a couple of probes. I think Hal has volunteered. He wants to get back at them for killing him.”

This was met with cheers of approval and a truncated rendition of “Bicycle Built for Two.” I waited until relative quiet returned, then turned to Garfield. “Care to give us your theory on the weapon itself?”

Garfield stepped up and bowed to the audience with a grin. “The size of their Death Star wannabe—I’ve been calling it the Death Asteroid—says it all, I think. That thing is probably all fusion reactors and accumulators of some kind. Through all the chases of the various Bobs and drones and scouts, they’ve never fired one twice in the same encounter. That indicates to me that discharging it is expensive in some way. My guess is that they have to charge up the accumulators for some ridiculous amount of time before they can fire. So one strategy in a dogfight would be to get them to fire at a decoy. We just have to have something that looks dangerous enough.”

Garfield’s presentation was met with quiet nods and thoughtful looks—the ultimate compliment in a Bob-moot.

“Resources?” I looked over at Hungry. Yeah, Hungry had happened to pick a direction that brought him in line with one of my transmissions.

He started to answer, but was interrupted by Wally.

“Hold on a minute!” Wally stepped forward. “Have we decided on war already? I mean, yeah, we have to do something, but have we decided how much yet?”

There were scattered groans and a few catcalls, but it was a good question.

I nodded to Wally, then said, “I’ve been operating under the assumption that we’re going for all-out war. But really, are we prepared to wipe out an entire intelligent species? Even one that has done the same to others?”

Someone at the back yelled, “Hell, yes!”

“Yeah, okay. We’ll probably vote on that at some point, but—”

Thor interrupted me. “I think a better question is, can we wipe them out? The mining vessel wreck that Mario found had superior tech, some of which we’re still trying to figure out. They have the Death Asteroid. They have better SURGE drives than us. They can beam power through SUDDAR…”

“And they’re building a friggin’ Dyson sphere,” Wally added.

“Here’s the thing,” Thor said, trying to regain the floor. “Right now, all we’ve done is make some random incursions around the edges. No real damage or anything. We’ll get exactly one chance for a surprise attack of some kind. After that, it’ll be toe-to-toe punch-ups and hit-and-run attacks on both sides. The million-dollar question is, can we win that war?”

Dead silence. Every Bob present understood the ramifications. If we picked a fight and lost, the damage would impact more than just our egos. Bob-1’s Deltans, human colonists, and any other intelligent species in the area might be drawn into the conflict, or at least exposed to future attack. It was a daunting responsibility. We had to be sure we could win before we went in swinging.

“And if we don’t do anything,” Garfield pointed out, “they’ll keep on raiding other systems to build their damned sphere. Hal calculated that they’ll have to clean out another hundred systems or so to finish that thing.”

“Plus or minus fifty,” Hungry added.

“Yeah, okay, the error bars are huge. But fifty to a hundred and fifty systems means maybe five to fifteen systems with life, based on our admittedly limited experience. And at least a couple will have intelligent life.”

“Yes, because that couple will include Deltans, Earth, and the colonists. A hundred systems requires them to go out at least thirty to forty light years, after you discount the systems with little to no metallicity. That covers the complete Bobiverse, as far as I know.”

I looked around at the audience for any other comments. No one seemed inclined to volunteer an opinion. “Okay, guys, time to wrap up the town hall part of this soiree, although you’re all welcome to stay as long as you want and discuss things with each other.” I waited a moment for any objections. “Our big issue seems to be the risk involved in going to war with a species that appears to be more advanced than we are and probably outnumbers us. Let’s meet in a week and see if we have anything new on that front.”

People immediately formed into small groups, and the Jeeveses began circulating again with food and drink.





40. Gotcha

Riker

February 2178

Vulcan

The man sat in front of a large bank of monitors. He watched one for a few moments, then moved to the next. He never seemed to stop, never rested.

The little red farmhouse sat far to the north of VEHEMENT central. Nothing about it was distinctive. No visible technology, no radio broadcasts, nothing to indicate this was anything other than the home of some elderly recluse.

Except for an occasional scatter of maser radiation. I grinned as I watched him work. A maser passing through fifty kilometers of atmosphere was not quite undetectable, if you were sufficiently motivated. A small bit of radiation scattering, a slight warming of the air…

Passive detection meant he didn’t know I’d picked up his signal. It meant he didn’t know I was listening in on his conversations. Encrypted SCUT communications meant he couldn’t detect my drones.

Well, well, well. Time for payback. But first, I wanted him to know…





41. Casualties

Bob

July 2182

Delta Eridani

[Alert! Activity outside normal parameters!]

I looked up, eyes wide. Guppy had standing orders to alert me if anything unusual occurred in or around the village. Of course Guppy, being Guppy, was short on details.

I activated the village VR, and found myself in the middle of a full-scale battle. At first I thought it was a gorilloid attack, but quickly realized that no gorilloids were in evidence anywhere. Instead, Deltans battled Deltans with spears, clubs, and axes. I could see a dozen or more bodies, either unconscious or dead.

Archimedes!

I ordered the VR to zoom in on Archimedes and his family. To my relief, I found that their tent was just outside the edge of the riot. Archimedes and Buster stood with bows in hand and arrows nocked. Belinda and Diana stood to either side, holding spears. That sight, as much as anything else, unnerved me. Neither female had ever shown interest in anything weapon-related.

I knew that father and son enjoyed a well-deserved reputation as expert shots, though. In fact, the edge of the battle seemed to particularly avoid the area immediately around his tent. Just as well. Fallout or not, if someone threatened Archimedes, they’d earn a visit from a personnel buster.

Marvin popped in. “What the hell? What caused this?”

“No idea, Marv. I was working on something else when Guppy alerted me. I’ll review the surveillance when I have time, but right now I just need to keep Archimedes safe.”

Marvin nodded, and took over control of a couple of busters just in case.

We waited, tense. Archimedes and Buster drew back on their bows and took aim a couple of times, but in every case, whatever Deltans had attracted their attention thought better of it and moved off.

Eventually the action died down. Deltans began backing away from the melee, still brandishing weapons. And now we had a chance to see the carnage. Property damage in the area of the riot was total, of course. Hopefully the owners had managed to flee the scene, but they’d be rebuilding from scratch. I counted seventeen bodies lying motionless on the ground. More than twice that number were bleeding and calling for help.

I wanted to throw up. What could possibly justify this? What could have set it off?

Marvin and I exchange glances and, without a word, I shut down the VR.

“I hope the medicine people can handle the number of patients,” Marvin said.

“They’ll have to, Marv. I couldn’t do anything with drones, even if I could take the chance on exposing myself.”

Marvin sighed. “I guess I understand why you’re always going on about Bill’s androids. It’d be great to have one available right now.”

“Yeah, I know, but he’s just not to that point yet. I keep bugging him, though.”

We sat down and I called up the video recordings for the last couple of hours. Marvin and I spent several full seconds reviewing them.

Finally, we sat back and Marvin shook his head. “Remember when we thought the Deltans were smart?”

“Yeah, no kidding,” I said. “The stupid. It burns.”

The whole thing—the riot, the injuries, the deaths—had been started by an argument over how to divvy up a small prey animal. Unbelievable.

We stared into space for a few more moments, getting over the shock. Finally, I found my voice. “I’m going to go with the idea of population pressure as a trigger, unless something better presents itself. And I’m going to have a talk with Archimedes.”

* * *

The drone sat on the ground in front of Archimedes, looking very much like a rock. Archimedes slowly turned a flint core over in his hands, pretending to examine it. Anyone observing him would assume he was working on his flint.

“I think you’re right, bawbe,” Archimedes said in a low voice. “Things seem to be the most tense when everyone is home. When hunters are out, it’s more peaceful.”

“Not a surprise, Archimedes. We’ve known for a long time that animals can be more stressed when things get crowded—even animals that like to live in groups.”

“So what do we do? Kick a bunch of people out of the village?”

I laughed. “Archimedes, let me introduce you to something called marketing. You don’t tell them they have to do it; you convince them that they want to do it, and that you don’t want them to. Works especially well with teenagers.”

Archimedes looked thoughtful for a few seconds, then smiled back. “I think I see where you’re going. So how do we do this?”

I thought for a moment. “Okay, here’s what we need to do…”



“Reverse psychology,” I said. The translation routine rendered that as “backwards trickery,” and Archimedes looked confused.

I sighed and tried again. “Okay, here’s a story from my home. A great leader wanted to introduce potatoes to his people, because they were a good thing to grow. He made announcements, he visited villages, but no one was interested or wanted to change. So he grew some himself and passed a law that potatoes were just for leaders, and villagers weren’t allowed to eat them. Within a couple of hands of days, all his potatoes had been stolen and people were growing them.” I watched Archimedes, trying to guess if he’d got the point.

Archimedes frowned. “Wait, they grew the tubers? Like, told the plants where to grow? Why not just go out and pick them?”

I sighed—a very human expression, but one that Archimedes had grown to understand. He grinned at my frustration.

“We’ve talked about farming, Archimedes. You can grow a lot of something in a small space if you’re organized about it. But the point…” I glared at him, but of course he couldn’t see that. “…is that he got people to do something by telling them that they couldn’t. Maybe your people aren’t stubborn that way—”

Archimedes interrupted me with a laugh. “Yeah, we are. Do you remember Buster when he was young?”

We shared a chuckle over the memories. Headstrong didn’t begin to cover it.

“Okay bawbe, I get it. So we just tell the gangs they can’t go to a new village?”

“Er, no, that won’t really do it. We don’t tell them anything at all. We start talking among ourselves about repopulating the other village sites, and doing it before the gangs get the same idea. And we talk loudly, and we do it where they might overhear.” I paused to let him consider what I was saying. “Get some of the council involved, to make it seem credible. Really, just pretend we’re actually thinking about something like that, and start making plans.”

“And this will work?” Archimedes shook his head. “I really wonder about your people.”

“Want to place a bet?”

Archimedes grinned and shook his head.





42. Business

Howard

March 2193

Vulcan

The Enniscorthy Distillery Company was doing well. I looked over the spreadsheet. We were just barely keeping up with orders. And we insisted on C.O.D., so no receivables issues.

After some discussion, we’d decided we needed a planetbound distillery, and we brought Stéphane in to set that up.



Bridget slapped the cover closed on her tablet, then set it on the desk. She worked her shoulder and spine a few times before leaning back in the chair.

Stéphane frowned in her direction. “Backache again? You should see the doctor.”

Bridget answered with a noncommittal smile, then looked towards my image on the phone. “I guess you don’t get backaches, right?”

“Not unless I want to. We Bobs try to keep things as realistic as possible, most of the time, though. I don’t need to let my muscles go stiff, but stretching them out feels good.”

She nodded, staring into space. “You’re effectively immortal, aren’t you? How old are you personally, Howard?”

“Well, I’ve only existed for eight years’ subjective time as Howard. But my memories go back to Original Bob’s earliest memories as a child, maybe around two years old. So I remember around twenty-nine years as Original Bob, then four years as Bob-1 before he built his first set of clones; four years as Riker; fifteen years as Charles, who was one of Riker’s first clones; and eight years since Charles cloned me. That’s subjective time, as I said. There’s a lot of relativistic time dilation in there. So, I’ve experienced sixty years of life.”

She made a face at me. “That sounds complicated. Do you share thoughts?”

“With the other Bobs? No. When a Bob is cloned, he wakes up with the same memories as his parent at the moment the backup was made. After that, though, we each go our own way.”

“Wow. I’m not sure I could handle that. Life is complicated enough.”

“Well, what about as an afterlife?” I smiled at her. “Original Bob had to die first, before he became a replicant. Not much future in death, I’m told.”

“On the other hand, your relatives stop calling.”

“We do have one non-Bob, you know. Henry Roberts is the Australian probe replicant.”

She made a moue of something, maybe disapproval. “Yeah, word is he’s not fully bolted down.”

“Mm, well, Henry had some issues with sensory deprivation early on. We know how to handle it now. Any new replicants would probably be fine.” I looked at her sideways. “You thinking of applying?”

“No, just curious.”

Stéphane added, one eyebrow arched, “Immortality sounds good, though.”





43. An Exchange of Words

Riker

March 2178

Sol

“Hello, Mr. Vickers.”

The man at the other end of the call looked briefly surprised, but recovered quickly. “Well, I’m impressed. There was some question about whether you’d ever manage to figure things out. I guess it was too much to hope for that you’d just destroy each other, instead.”

I smiled at him—the kind of smile a cat shows to a bird. Just teeth. “Uh huh. You’ve been a busy little beaver. We’ve determined that the attacks on Brazil were also your work. I assume the idea was to try to foment another war, maybe knock off a few more people. So those deaths are also on you.”

Vickers waved a hand dismissively. “They had the chance to go voluntarily. It’s our duty to help them along. I don’t expect you to understand.”

“I doubt if you even care if anyone understands. My guess is, your ‘announcements’ are more about ego than any desire to help or inform.”

Vickers grinned at me. “Already descending to personal insults? I expected a little bit more from you.”

“You flatter yourself. This isn’t a duel of words. You aren’t important enough. I’m satisfying my curiosity, nothing more.” I carefully kept my face neutral. I didn’t want to give this guy any satisfaction. “And on that subject, this whole VEHEMENT thing seems more like a vehicle for you than a cause. People like you aren’t joiners, unless you think the organization can benefit you. So what’s your ultimate goal?”

A flash of anger crossed Vickers’ face. “If you must know, replicant, I’m your maker. I invented the replicant systems that you inhabit. The systems that FAITH stole without as much as a nod. You don’t deserve to exist, you shouldn’t be alive. VEHEMENT is a suitable tool for achieving that goal.”

“I doubt that the members of VEHEMENT will feel good about finding out they’ve been used.”

“Don’t be naïve, replicant. They know I have my own motivations. They use me, I use them. Everyone gets what they want.”

“And what does Ambassador Gerrold get out of it?”

“Gerrold was working with me on the replicant systems in Australia. When you stole from me, you stole from him. He was a little more interested in the fiduciary rewards—typical small mind—but his hate is useful.”

I nodded. I had about everything I needed. Except the one last item. Permission.

“Homer committed suicide, you know. Couldn’t live with what you’d made him do.”

“Good. It’s no more than he, and all of you, deserve.”

Permission received.

“And the people you killed, in Brazil and elsewhere? Do you care about them?”

“I think I’ve already answered that question. Is there anything else that you wanted to say that might actually interest me? Before I continue the task of ending your existence? You can’t stop me, you know. You’re simply not good enough.” Vickers gave me a condescending smile.

“Hmm, well, before I called you, I stenciled your name on a ship-buster. It should be there in about twenty seconds. Let’s see if that’s good enough.”

Vickers shook his head, the smile never wavering. “And you’ll have missed. You’ll take out VEHEMENT headquarters, but not me.”

I cocked my head sideways. “Oh, you misunderstand. There’s a buster heading there, too. But the one I’m talking about is coming in on your position, fifty-five kilometers north and two kilometers east of the VEHEMENT base. Little red farmhouse, to all outside appearances.”

The smile left Vickers’ face. His eyes went wide and he turned towards the window. The window that had allowed the drones to verify his actual location. Nobody thinks of everything.

“If you have some variation on a god, asshole, you might want to have a very quick conversation with him. And fuck you to hell!”

Vickers leaped from his chair just as the buster arrived. One thousand pounds of high-tensile steel impacted the ground at planetary escape velocity. It wouldn’t quite match the Barringer crater, but it was good enough for pest control. The video cut off as the entire area was vaporized. At the same moment, another impact fifty-odd kilometers south created a matching crater. New Zealand would have a couple of new lakes, by and by.

From a video window off to the side, Bill began a slow clap, echoed by Charles and Ralph.

* * *

“After all your talk, you’re not above pummeling the Earth when it’s convenient.” Gerrold glared out of the video window at me. I had preempted today’s UN session to announce the effective end of VEHEMENT.

I couldn’t decide if Gerrold was trying to bluff his way through this, or if he thought his connection with VEHEMENT was still unknown. In any case, I wasn’t in the mood.

I stood up, placed my hands on my desk, and leaned into the camera. As I opened my mouth to speak, I realized I was too enraged even to form words. At that moment, if I’d had a ship-buster in position, Gerrold would have died.

I frame-jacked slightly, and took a few deep breaths. Just barely in control, I glared at him. “Listen, you putrid, self-inflated bag of air. A good friend of mine is dead, driven to suicide by your friend and former co-worker with your full knowledge and cooperation. People in Brazil are dead for no other reason than to fulfill his sick political goals and to allay your butt-hurt. Again, with your knowledge and approval. And most of the rest of humanity is on starvation rations at the moment. So I am not in the mood to put up with your hypocritical yammering, and the only question right now is whether I let your own countrymen impeach and hopefully lynch you, or whether I come and get you myself, take you upstairs, and push you out an airlock. Why don’t you mouth me off just one more time, you festering pile of crap. Go ahead. Just one more word!” I glared out the video window at him. In the entire UN gathering, there was not so much as a cough. I held the moment for another heartbeat, then sneered at him. “If you show up tomorrow, I’m going with plan B. I’m just sayin’.”

With a flourish, I cut the connection.

Charles grinned at me. “Say, you’re kind of scary when you get riled.”

I was too upset to smile back, but I did give him a shrug. “That’s for Homer.”





44. Baseball

Bill

March 2189

Epsilon Eridani

“Hey, batter batter, heeeeeeeeeeey, batter.”

Howard grinned at the outfield. “Has that ever worked?”

Bob yelled back, “It’s traditional. Just go with it.”

I sailed a perfect underhand toss across the plate. Howard swung and totally whiffed.

“That’s three. Everyone advance.”

Howard shrugged, materialized a glove, and jogged to the outfield. We were generally able to field a pretty full Scrub game these days, but we couldn’t depend on enough people for two teams. Original Bob had never been much of a team player anyway; we all preferred Scrub. More of a personal goals thing.

Some of us could even hit the ball.

I moved to the catcher position, and Loki took over as pitcher. Everyone else shuffled forward into the next position. As soon as we were all ready, Marvin came up to bat. Loki wound up and threw the ball right over the plate.

About ten feet over the plate.

There were boos from the outfield. I stood up. “Yeah, you’ve been practicing, my ass. That’s with practice?”

“At least it’s going in the right direction now.”

“Uh huh. In the interest of not walking every batter for the next half hour, I’m going to allow some Guppy intervention. Put it across at people height, okay?” I nodded to Marvin.

On the next pitch, Marvin knocked it into the outfield, between center and right. Howard and Dopey looked at each other, each waiting for the other to move. Marvin, no dummy, was closing in on second before the two stooges decided who should make an effort. By the time they had the ball into the infield, Marvin was at third. He took a moment to grin and thumb his nose.

We were all fairly evenly matched in sports prowess, for obvious reasons. It came down to who was paying attention and who was letting their mind drift. We played for a subjective half hour, the agreed-upon duration, then retired to the pub.

The pub was hosted in the same matrix that handled Bob-moots, so it had more than enough processor power to handle all the Bobs and all the beer. And Hungry’s coffee, of course.

As always, we ended up talking shop.

I had a group encircling me that wanted to talk about Bullwinkle.

“Bullwinkle? Really?”

“Hey, why not?” I grinned at Thor. “The thing needed an external antenna array because of the required bandwidth. I just played with the aesthetics a bit. You’ve seen the pictures.”

Howard chuckled. “It would be hard not to think of a moose. I think your sense of proportion was a little off when you built that thing.”

There were answering laughs from several people, plus some perplexed expressions from those who hadn’t seen the pictures.

“So what’s the long game, Bill?”

I shrugged. “Nothing dramatic, Mario. It’s an interesting project, and could be useful—”

“—It would give us a physical presence,” Howard interjected. “I remember Riker being frustrated sometimes, working with the enclaves. And it’s even more so for me. We have all this interaction with the ephemerals—”

“Please don’t use that word, Howard.” I gave him the stink-eye, and he looked embarrassed for a moment.

“It’s not intended to be derogatory, Bill. It’s just—”

“Then just say humans. Sure, it’s not derogatory, but it is dismissive. And it will eventually shape an attitude that their lives matter less.”

Howard gave me a blank look, then shrugged. “Anyway, the point is that I could be so much more effective if I could, you know, ‘walk among them’. Flying around, looking like a giant pill-bug, and giving orders through a speaker is just incredibly limiting.”

“Politicians did it for centuries,” someone muttered.

I grinned and said, “That’s pill, not pill-bug.”

“There are even better words…”

“Anatomical…”

“Scatological…”

I glared around the group. “If you guys break out into Gilbert and Sullivan, I’m leaving!”

We all laughed and the tension was broken. But I was still left with a weird twinge of foreboding.

Eventually, the moose groupies broke up and joined different conversations. I wandered around the pub, listening in but not engaging. Topics ranged from the impending arrival of the latest colony ships to Omicron2 Eridani, the chances of a colony being successful on Klown Kar Planet, wildlife on Vulcan, speculation on the Others, and my asteroid-mover project. I moved in to listen on the last item.

Mario stopped what he was saying and turned to me. “Bill, we were just wondering about the capacity of the mover plates. How big can you go?”

I grinned at him. This was one of my favorite subjects. “Right now, we could probably apply a vector to something about half the size of Ceres. So, about five hundred kilometers in diameter. But it would be a tiny, tiny vector, in the range of a hundredth of a gee.” I thought for a moment. “How big can we go? Well, you keep adding plates to get more push. But that makes control of plate interactions more complex. It’s just an engineering problem, though. We’re learning how to tune the drive so that most of the energy goes into moving the payload instead of keeping the plates in position. There’s no theoretical maximum that I’ve been able to find.”

“So we could eventually move stars?” Mario grinned at me, obviously trolling.

I laughed. “Sure, in a million years or so. Theoretically possible doesn’t mean easy.”

I nodded to the group and moved on. Another group was discussing the expanding bubble of the Bobiverse. In principle, we should be approaching a forty-light-year radius by now. But reproduction tended to be uneven and spotty. It was generally accepted that we Bobs were only marginally enthusiastic about cloning more of ourselves. I shrugged. The Others might change that.

The moot continued for many objective minutes—hours in our time-sense. Eventually, though, Bobs started to pay their respects and pop out. It had been a good game. Okay, not really, but a good post-game wrap-up. I smiled to myself. That was really the point.

* * *

“I have something to show you.” Garfield was trying and mostly failing to keep a huge grin off his face. Well, okay, not bad news, then.

“All right, Gar, I’ll bite. What’cha got?”

“I give you my answer to Bullwinkle.” With a flourish, he popped up a video window. “Rocky!”

“That does not look like Rocky. More like Rodan.”

“Hey, if we’re going to get pedantic,” Garfield said, laughing, “the real Bullwinkle was bipedal.”

“If we’re going to get pedantic, the real Bullwinkle was a cartoon. So, does it fly?”

“In theory.” The android stood in the hold of a cargo drone, still attached to its support cradle. Metadata told me that the drone was parked on the surface of Ragnarök. Garfield opened the cargo bay door, revealing the bare rock of the planet’s surface. His avatar froze as he switched his consciousness to the android. Another window popped up, showing Rocky’s viewpoint.

Rocky detached itself from the cradle and waddled to the door and out into the Ragnarök wilderness. The communications relay drone stayed with it and provided another viewpoint.

The android was not graceful on foot. Not really surprising. The still relatively thin air of Ragnarök would require a lot of wing surface in order to lift off, even with the powerful artificial musculature. But walking wasn’t the point.

Garfield set himself, opened his massive wings, and launched. Several powerful flaps were sufficient to get off the ground, and he steadily gained altitude. The comms drone kept pace, keeping Rocky centered in the frame. The other window showed the view from Rocky’s eyes.

Honestly, it wasn’t impressive from any objective metric. Drones could fly faster, higher, with less energy, and were more maneuverable. But based on my experience with Bullwinkle, Garfield would be experiencing something entirely different from flying a drone.

Things went well for the first two minutes.

Then Garfield ran into some turbulence. Maybe a crosswind, maybe a downdraft, who knew? But Rocky went into a roll that approached ninety degrees. He attempted to correct, and rolled farther in the opposite direction. The motion kept reinforcing itself, and every attempt by Garfield to get it under control either made it worse or introduced pitch and yaw.

Finally, Garfield folded his wings and went into free fall. This stopped the harmonic cycle, but he was now rapidly losing altitude.

“Maybe time to start flying again, buddy.” I blushed as soon as the words left my mouth. Nothing like stating the obvious to help out.

“Thanks, Bill, I might just try that.”

Garfield was taking my foot-in-mouth moment with good grace. I resolved to try shutting the hell up as a strategy.

Garfield stuck out his wings just the smallest amount, trying to establish stability. It seemed to be working for a few moments. Then the rushing air snapped his wings out like a parachute opening up. Every status light went red, and Garfield screamed.

I pulled back to VR, to find Garfield sitting hunched forward, hugging himself, a wild look in his eyes. He took a few deep breaths, then glared at me.

“Um, I guess we did too good of a job of setting up the neural feedback. That hurt!”

I nodded. “In theory, that’s what we want. But maybe we should put a limiter on it.”

“Yeah, let’s do that.” Garfield stood and stretched carefully. “Where’s Rocky?”

“Still on his way down. Wings are snapped, though, as is his keel. I don’t think you want to be in there for the landing.” I pulled up the video feed from the trailing drone, which was still faithfully following the tumbling android. Rocky was definitely junk, and Garfield hadn’t thought to add a parachute.

I looked at Garfield, and he shrugged. “Well, it’s not the fall that kills you…” he said, with a rueful half-smile on his face.

We watched as Rocky hit the ground. Every status indicator went dead, and the trailing drone picked up the loud, hollow thump of impact.

I instructed the cargo drone to head for the impact site and pick up the pieces. I turned to Garfield.

“So, other than the unfortunate ending, how did it feel?”

“Incredible. I was flying. Actually flying, not just working a control panel. I think hang gliding might come close, but nothing else.”

I smiled at him. I could understand the feeling. “It’s a lot more real than VR.”

“Yeah, and what we’ve got here will allow Bobs to interact with the real world. As beings, I mean, not as floating cameras.”

“You’re right, Garfield. In an emergency, I think we could even use them with the comms drone hanging around, although that’s messy.”

Garfield gazed into space for a few moments. “I wonder if we’re missing the big picture. Take this to its logical conclusion and we could replace our HEAVEN hulls with bodies.”

“Like mechanical versions of van Vogt’s Silkies?” That was a mind-boggling thought.

“Yeah, like that. Bill, we may be the beginning of a new species. Homo siderea.”

“Hmm, the TODO just keeps getting longer and longer. Let’s see if we can get rid of the trailing communication drone first, okay?”

Garfield smiled and shrugged. “So, you know what comes now, right?”

“What?”

He grinned and held the beat. “Rocky II.”

“I hate you.”





45. Replication

Howard

August 2193

Vulcan

“You want what?” Riker frowned and leaned back in surprise.

I waited for him to finish overacting. “Any information on creating a replicant. We have the replicant hardware and all, but we’re a little light on the part where you start with a body and end up with a recording.”

“Why the fleeming hell would you want that?”

I shrugged. “No particular reason. I just think it’s a gap in our knowledge base. If we wanted to create a new replicant, right now we couldn’t. Basically, we’re it.”

Riker gave me the hairy eyeball, and a caption flashed below him, at waist height: ‘Not sure if joking or serious.’

I laughed. Will rarely attempted a joke, especially since Homer, but when he did, it was always funny.

“What’s really going on, Howard?”

“It’s nothing, really, Will. I’m not imminently intending to replicate someone, if that’s what you’re thinking. It’s just that we only have the one generation of humans to get the information from. After that, we’d be reduced to reverse-engineering, with all the failures and false starts that implies.”

“It has nothing to do with Dr. Sheehy at all?”

I kept my face deadpan. “Not particularly.” It would seem there was no privacy at all in Bob-town. Anyway, we were just friends. “We’re just friends.”

Will looked at me, unmoving for a few more milliseconds, then nodded his head and looked away. “Okay, Howard, I’ll bring it up with the appropriate people at this end. I take it you’ve talked to Cranston already, about any info that FAITH might still have on the process?”

“Mm, yeah. He, of course, wanted a crapton of concessions in return, before I’d even find out if he had anything worthwhile.”

“Well, hell.” Will grinned at me. “Why didn’t you say so? Doing an end-run around Cranston is all the motivation I need.” He finished his coffee, gave me a nod, and vanished.

I figured that would work. Just needed to not sell it too hard, or he would have gotten suspicious.

I pulled up the medical report that I’d intercepted, labelled B. Sheehy. I examined the scan for the hundredth time, hoping maybe this time it would be different.

* * *

Cranston’s face glowed a most unhealthy shade of red in the video window. I tried not to smile.

“Dammit, your product is showing up in our territory. I’ve told you we’re not interested. I’ve forbade you from selling your devil’s brew here. I want it stopped.”

He was mad. Cursing and everything. Excellent.

“Minister Cranston—Oh, it’s President Cranston, now, isn’t it? Anyway, sir, I am not selling or even offering any of my alcohol-themed products in New Jerusalem. However, your attempt at controlling the supply has likely driven the price up high enough that it’s being brought in from Spitsbergen by unorthodox methods. I have to admit, their consumption does seem rather high…”

“Then put a stop to it!”

“Absolutely, sir. I’ll put a line on the label, ‘Not for resale in New Jerusalem’. That should do it. After all, smugglers and bootleggers are always law-abiding.”

Amazing. I wouldn’t have thought it possible for his face to get redder. Live and learn. But he wasn’t finished, apparently.

“And I will lodge an official protest at the idea of you using the colony equipment to engage in private enterprise. You are profiteering off of our backs.”

I shook my head in amazement. “First, I made all of those donuts and gave them to the colonies free of charge. Second, I’m not using one of those donuts. I made my own. And third, not that it’s actually relevant, but we’re gradually moving production planetside. Once that’s done, I’ll add the donut to the colony inventory.”

“Tread carefully, replicant. You might find access to your families restricted.”

That was not an unexpected tactic, but it didn’t make it any easier to take. I had my response ready. “Mr. President, you signed an agreement before we shipped you here that established certain inalienable rights for your citizens. You also entered into a personal agreement with Riker concerning specifics of our family. Start reneging on that, and this will escalate quickly.”

We spent several seconds in a stare-off before Cranston broke eye contact. “Very well. We will pursue the border options, for now. However, this is not over.” He reached out of frame and broke connection.

“Wow.”

I turned to the video window showing Riker’s image. “Wow, indeed, Will. Should we be setting up an escape plan for the family?”

“As one alternative.” Will stared into space for a few moments. “Another would be to just remove the irritant.”

My eyebrows rose. “The whiskey?”

“No, you twit. Cranston.”

Now that was a plan I could get behind.





46. Klown Kar Planet

Rudy

February 2190

Epsilon Indi

I did a test ping to Riker, to check my tau. I’d been doing this regularly for the last couple of days, waiting for it to drop to the point where I could maintain a VR connection. We’d been exchanging emails for a few weeks, but a tradition of sorts had developed where the moment when a travelling Bob could maintain a VR session with a stationary Bob was considered arrival. It was more significant than actual entry into the system.

I received a response, then Riker popped into VR.

“Hey, Rudy. Good to hear from you. Where’s Edwin?”

“Still not slowed down enough. I moved ahead so I could get a look at KKP. I’ll be there in about eight days, and Exodus-6 will be another week.”

Riker nodded. “Call me back when you’ve had a close look at KKP.”

* * *

The planet itself wasn’t particularly memorable. It had oceans, it had land. The day and night cycles, though, had imposed a certain chaos on the evolution of life. Based on Linus’ notes and what I could see from quick drone flyabouts, the planet had gone through something equivalent to the Cambrian Explosion, then kept every single branch. Both plants and animals came in a huge number of phyla. At first glance, it could appear to a non-scientist as if every individual plant and animal was its own species. Linus had theorized that the weird light cycles created a large number of niches and opportunities for competition.

This included several different versions of photosynthesis, optimized for different parts of the spectrum. Which resulted in what I suspected was the real reason for the name—the planet had more colors than a patchwork quilt. Even the oceans came in different hues, due to the different breeds of plankton.

Between the sun’s path through the sky over the course of the year, and the extra heat and light supplied by the Jovian primary, days, nights, and even seasons would be hard to differentiate. I chuckled, perusing the notes. Linus had tentatively named the Jovian Big Top. I doubted either name would survive the colony’s first general meeting, honestly. But it was fun while it lasted.

As had become habit with the Bobs, Linus had left some mining drones and an autofactory behind to process raw ore from asteroids into refined metals, and left them in orbit with a beacon attached. Epsilon Indi wasn’t a rich system, but the automation had still managed to accumulate several hundred thousand tons of material. It would be a good start.

I pinged Edwin. I received an invitation and popped into his VR.

“Hi, Rudy.”

“Edwin.” I sat down and accepted a coffee from Jeeves. Edwin’s VR was, in my opinion, one of the better ones. He’d created a living area with huge windows on one wall that looked out on whatever view was really available outside his vessel. That would have been a little boring during the trip, but now it showed Big Top as he approached orbital insertion. Edwin was still several million miles away, but this was a Jovian planet. It already dominated the sky.

“So, what do we have?” he asked.

“This planet is like that Harrison novel,” I answered. “What was it? Oh, yeah, Deathworld. Where everything was deadly.”

“That bad?”

I waved a hand. “Possibly I exaggerate. But the ecosystem is very, very competitive. I know they are making do with a fence on Vulcan, but for here, I’m leaning more towards domes. Not for atmosphere, but to keep out the ickies.”

Edwin laughed. “Yeah, there’s a technical term for you. Ickies.”

“No, it’s actually a species name.” I smirked in response. “Blame Linus. Ickies are a kind of flying leech with multiple suckers. I think the name is appropriate.”

Edwin started to look a little green. “Oh, lovely. I might just start a betting pool on whether the colonists take one look around and start screaming at me to take them back.”

“Mmm. But, you know, according to Howard, the Cupid bug is well on the way to being eradicated. Maybe a drone specifically designed as an ickie-killer will do the trick.”

“Jeez.” Edwin pinched the bridge of his nose. “On the plus side, once I unload, I get to go back to Earth.” He looked up at me and grinned. “You, not so much.”

I responded with one finger.





47. New Village

Bob

September, 2182

Delta Eridani

The Deltan council, including Archimedes and Arnold, watched as almost a hundred Deltan adolescents marched away from camp, yelling insults and challenges at the onlookers. The council members did a creditable job of maintaining straight faces, some even managing to look upset.

When the tail end of the parade disappeared into the bush, Arnold slapped Archimedes on the back and said, “That was great.” He then leaned in close and said, in a low voice that only Archimedes and the spy drone could hear, “I’m sure bawbe had a hand in it.”

Archimedes’ eyes got wide and he looked very concerned, but Arnold just shook his head and said, “I don’t need to know. I’m just glad it worked.”

Other council members gave Archimedes a nod or a smile as they dispersed.



Marvin and I looked at each other, then began laughing. The worst troublemakers in Camelot, completely convinced that it was their idea, had just marched off to one of the old abandoned village sites to repopulate it. And Archimedes was getting the credit for thinking up and masterminding the plot. Reverse psychology… not just for humans.

Marvin lost his smile and got a worried expression. “Of course, it fixes the immediate problem, but everything we do seems to have side effects down the road. What if they go to war with Camelot in a few years?”

“Don’t borrow trouble, Marv.” I sighed and sat back. “Sure as hell, something will hit the fan, but let’s worry about it when it happens.”

But he was probably right.





48. Operation

Howard

September 2193

Vulcan

I texted Stéphane for the third time in the last hour. I couldn’t call him anymore, as he’d blocked voice calls from me after my last attempt.

His reply came back within a minute. “Still in surgery. Calm down. Aren’t you supposed to be a computer?”

Okay, that stung. Well, not really, but point taken. I took a deep breath and attempted to relax.

Bridget’s surgery was already running overtime. There was no scenario in which that was a good thing. I’d tried distracting myself with a few of the many projects I had on the go, but I couldn’t maintain concentration.

In desperation I checked in on Bill. Guppy indicated that he was running Bullwinkle, so wouldn’t be responding except in an emergency. I doubted that me freaking out really qualified, so I didn’t bother leaving a message. I had a quick peek at his terraforming blog, but there was nothing new.

I was seriously considering just frame-jacking down, when Stéphane called me.

“Hi Howard. You can stop with the worrying now. She’s out of surgery, and the doctors say it looks positive. The tumor was a little more spread than they expected, so it took longer to excise. But all good.”

I thanked Stéphane, traded some meaningless comments, then hung up. I sat back, took several deep breaths, until I thought that I had it under control. And without so much as a by-the-way, I leaned forward and started to sob.

Just friends.

* * *

There had been a lot of improvements in medicine since the days of Original Bob, but some things hadn’t changed all that much. Cancer could be nipped in the bud if caught early, but there was no vaccination yet. And the knife was still often the only effective treatment.

This was unacceptable. What the hell had they been doing for a hundred years? I resolved to look into it when I had a chance.

Meanwhile, Stéphane sat at her bedside. He’d dialed me in through the room phone. While I waited, I sent a quick email to Bill to hurry the hell up with the androids. I knew it wouldn’t help, but it was action of a sort.

Stéphane and I traded an occasional desultory comment, but neither of us was in the mood for more. Finally, he turned to me. “I’m going to stretch and refuel. Some of us still have to eat. I’ll tell them not to come in and hang up the phone on you.” With a nod, he got up, leaving me to watch over Bridget.

If you’ve ever watched someone come out of anesthesia, it’s not like waking up. That can be sexy, under the right circumstances. Bridget looked more like a drowned rat that had just been given CPR. I made a note to myself to keep that observation private.

She finally opened one eye, looked around, and spotted me peering at her from the phone. She squinted, grimaced at me, and said, “Jeez, what do I need to do to get a day off?”

I laughed, then had to override the video image to keep from embarrassing myself. My image froze for a couple of milliseconds—not nearly long enough for her to notice. When I’d recovered control, I grinned at her. “Not to worry, sales are good. This year you can take Christmas off, and even use up some extra coal.”

I was considering what I would say next, when Stéphane walked back in, coffee in hand. Bridget’s face lit up, and Stéphane smiled when he saw she was awake. He exclaimed, “Ma minette!” and pulled up a chair as close to the bed as he could manage. He took her hand, and I ceased to exist for any practical purpose.

How did I miss this?

We made small talk. I don’t remember it. I’m sure I could play back my logs, but why? I made my excuses as soon as I could without appearing to be acting odd, then retreated to my VR.

Right, well, what did I expect? Bridget was a human. An ephemeral. Her plans would include a home, a family, a place in society. The more I thought about it, the more I realized that I’d been very carefully avoiding thinking about certain issues.

And one of the issues that had just come into focus was that I was an outsider. I saw the world through video calls and chat windows and drone cameras. I really shouldn’t have been surprised that something could develop right under my nose.

I materialized a bucket and kicked it as hard as I could. Strangely, it helped.





49. Arrival

Mulder

March 2195

Poseidon (Eta Cassiopeiae)

“Poseidon. Good name.” Marcus shook his head in mock amazement, then took a sip of his coke. “I’ve had a look at your summary and notes. Pretty cool. I really want to see a kraken.”

I smiled in response. “You won’t be disappointed. I promise. Anyway, right now, you’re…”

“I’m just settling into a polar orbit. Monty is about a week away, and should be down to VR tau by now. I’ll ping him.”

Marcus settled more comfortably into his seat and sipped thoughtfully on his straw. For some reason, Marcus had never taken to coffee. He preferred his virtual caffeine in carbonated form. Well, whatever.

At that moment, Monty popped in and materialized another chair for himself. He accepted a coffee from Jeeves and looked around.

My VR wasn’t particularly inspired, as such things go. I’d never felt the need to come up with something new and imaginative. I had a variation on Bob-1’s library, but with high windows for more sunlight, and more casual furniture.

“So, anyway, things grow big in the water, in direct proportion to the available space. A global ocean, eight hundred kilometers deep, makes for some very large nasties.”

Monty looked concerned. “They couldn’t take down a mat, could they?”

“Oh, hell no. Nothing’s that big. But on this planet, a day at the beach is likely to be fatal even if you don’t get wet. The kraken in particular has tentacles, and one of its feeding strategies is to grab animals off the edges of mats.”

“Right.” Monty nodded. “Well, the mats are a short-term solution, anyway. The colonists will be building floating cities for the long term. We’ll just need tough enough perimeter defenses to keep them out.”

“So,” I looked at him, changing the subject. “When are you going to decant the colonists?”

“I’m waking the Setup Management team right now. Couple of hours, they’ll be ready to start.” Unlike the land-based colonies in other systems, the teams here would be working from the colony transport—Monty—for a considerable time, and the civilian population likely wouldn’t start to emerge for a good six months. Future shipments would have it a little easier.

We had a number of variations on floating city plans on file. Free-floating cities had been a bit of a thing for a while in the twenty-second century. Of course, they had access to land-based support, and they didn’t have to deal with predators up to a hundred meters long, with tentacles.

* * *

Discussions with the Prep team hadn’t taken as long as I expected. I guess there’d been a lot of planning before they’d launched from Earth system, and there hadn’t been any surprises at this end. Yet.

I had tagged all the biggest mats with beacons, so we knew what was available. The Prep team picked a couple of large mats that were drifting in the north tropical current. They were both well over a hundred square km in area, complete with commensal ecosystems. Within a day, we were ferrying down supplies and equipment.

The colonists, a conglomerate of enclaves from Micronesia, the Maldives, Vanuatu, and Saint Lucia, would have to be awoken in small groups as living space was constructed on the mats. It would be about a year before Monty would be able to leave.

Marcus would be staying here to help with the colony setup after Monty headed back to Earth. He would build a fleet of human-crewed spaceships so that the colonists wouldn’t be dependent on us. With no land on Poseidon, all industry would have to be space-based, and Marcus didn’t want to play permanent taxi-to-the-world.

* * *

Marcus popped in without warning. “We just lost another settler.”

“Kraken?”

Marcus nodded and sat down. He took a moment to give Spike a chin-scritch, then materialized a Coke.

“I’m sure Chief Draper is pissed,” Monty said. “We have to come up with some better defense. We could go through the entire setup team pretty fast.”

“Or we could reconsider flying cities.” Marcus grinned at me.

“Oh for Pete’s sake, Marcus. There are no plans in the libraries for flying cities.”

“Yeah, but you could start with Bill’s asteroid mover and I bet you could end up with something that would hold a city in the air.”

“Let us know when you have a design, there, Marcus.”

Marcus made a dismissive gesture and changed the subject. “Well, we can’t stick to the status quo. The krakens will just keep getting bolder. But building floating cities without an established land base of some kind is going to require some inventive re-thinking.”

“Can we beef up the protection around the floating mats?” Monty asked.

In response, Marcus popped up a schematic view of the island. “Here’s the problem. The Kraken are able to wriggle a tentacle through the mat and grab inland prey. Native life has figured out how to tread lightly, but humans have two left feet, so to speak.”

“Plus,” I added, “all the equipment makes a racket.”

Monty rubbed his forehead, looking disgusted. “Um. Any ideas? Serious ones, I mean.”

“Actually, yes.” Marcus nodded. “I can adapt some library plans to construct an electrified net that discharges on contact. A million volts or so should provide some negative reinforcement.”

“Or a watery grave. Either is good.” I nodded. Nice.

Marcus grinned at me. “Now the bad news. To build the net, and to build the equipment necessary to deploy it, will add six months to our schedule. Draper will take that about as well as Butterworth would.”

“Moo,” I replied.

“Yeah, like that.”

Monty groaned. “I’m not thrilled either. It means I’m stuck here for another six months.”

“Suck it up. You’re immortal.”

“Bite me.”

We all grinned at each other. The routine exchange of insults felt sort of reassuring.

“Well,” Marcus finally said. “Guess we’d better go break the news.”

“What do you mean, ‘we’, Kemo Sabe?”

Marcus laughed and popped out.





50. Second Expedition

Loki

November 2195

82 Eridani

We flew straight into the 82 Eridani system without attempting any finesse. We were here to kick some ass and, more importantly, to finish the job that Khan and his group had started.

Twelve Bobs, with Version-4 vessels featuring even more heavily shielded reactors than the threes, and total radio silence. Special carbon-black exteriors ensured an almost-zero albedo, and we had borrowed from the military to arrive at profiles that were virtually invisible to radar. The only place we were vulnerable was SUDDAR detection, and as far as we knew we had the range advantage in that area.

There was no point in being subtle. But being tricky was definitely on the menu. We spread a net of observation drones in front of us, coasting with minimal systems. Interspersed with them were ship-busters and decoy drones. SCUT connections with every drone and buster guaranteed instant communications. Whether the enemy detected our outriders first or us first, we could still throw a surprise at them.

We didn’t know, of course, whether there were any Medeiri left from the first expedition. Or, for that matter, whether the Medeiros that escaped at Alpha Centauri might have made his way here. Best case, there would be nothing but the Brazilian AMIs, still patrolling the system looking for things to blow up. We’d brought plenty of decoys to cover that eventuality as well.

Yep, we were loaded for bear. We just had to hope that Medeiros hadn’t invented a bigger, better bear.

Ultra-low intensity version-4 SUDDAR wouldn’t even be detectable to traditional SUDDAR receivers unless the listener was specifically looking for it. We came into the system like a person in a pitch-black room, carefully feeling our way forward and ready to pull in our toes at the slightest sign of an obstacle.

We needn’t have bothered. Medeiros might not have a bigger bear, but he definitely had some kind of passive early warning system that we couldn’t detect. We were met by a solid wall of oncoming ordnance. The first engagement looked like a republic-vs-empire Star Wars shoot-em-up. And again Medeiros was using cloaking technology. But this time, we were ready for that.

It looked like Medeiros continued to depend on nukes as his main weapon. Four enemy drones detonated simultaneously as soon as they were within range of our defenders.

Nothing was going to survive being up close and personal with an exploding fission bomb, but in space the shock wave was a strictly short-range issue. At any distance, the main force of destruction would be the EMP. And we’d engineered for that, this time. It took Medeiros a dozen ineffective nukes before he caught on to the fact that we weren’t affected. At that point, flying nukes started trying to get in closer. We spiked them, we busterized them, we confused them with our own set of decoys. And we watched and listened for the source of the commands.

Then Medeiros showed that he had learned from our last encounter.

A wave of attack drones came at us that were completely different from the traditional flying nukes. Our attempts to spike them just bounced off.

“Oh, this is bad. What’s spike-proof?”

“Possibly something with a defensive magnetic field,” Elmer replied. “We’ll need to use busters on these guys.”

“Good call, Elmer. Okay, everyone, deploy half your busters forward. Any enemy drone that survives a spiking gets busterized.”

A flood of busters accelerated toward the oncoming ordnance. We carefully staggered them so that Medeiros couldn’t catch multiple busters with one nuke. The first contact produced so much carnage, between detonations and debris, that we couldn’t resolve the battlefield for several precious seconds.

Then I remembered reading the report on Riker’s first battle in Sol. “Scatter! Watch for passive incoming!” I sent a SUDDAR pulse ahead as I turned and accelerated at ninety degrees. Sure enough, the ping showed a massive number of dense objects hurtling towards us.

It was too late for three of us, though. Jeffrey, Milton, and Zeke disappeared from the status board as their signals cut off.

The only good thing about this attack strategy, if something could be considered good, was that the passive ordnance couldn’t chase us. With the field now clearing, we could verify that there wasn’t another wave on the way. At least, not yet. I wasn’t going to make any assumptions.

Our second wave of busters now engaged the remaining enemy drones. Up close the busters had an advantage, and we recorded almost 100% kills.

A momentary lull in encounters allowed me to scan the battlefield. For the moment, there was no movement. The question now was: did Medeiros have more in reserve?

A second SUDDAR sweep showed another wave of enemy ordnance coming in. We weren’t anywhere near done, yet. A quick count showed Medeiros had more drones than we had busters. This put us at a definite disadvantage. Plasma spikes helped to even things out with unprotected drones, though, and since building nukes was expensive of time and resources, I had to hope some of that incoming consisted of decoys.

“Has anyone picked up any transmissions from Medeiros, yet?”

A chorus of nos came back to me.

Damn. One of our planned strategies was to triangulate on the Brazilian craft’s transmissions. Our last battle with him had shown the wisdom of cutting off the head. But Medeiros seemed to have learned from last time in that area, as well.

I accepted a call from one of the crew.

“Hey, Loki?”

“What’s up, Verne?”

“I’ve been doing an analysis of Medeiros’ attack strategy. I don’t think he’s actively controlling the battle.”

“Pre-programmed decision trees? If so, those are very smart AMIs. We saw them running through some sophisticated strategies.”

“I think it’s a bit of both.”

“Oh, great. That’s helpful.”

I could hear the smile in Verne’s voice. “Well, it is, kind of. He’s probably set up a number of different battle scenarios and canned responses with different goal weightings. He changes response trees with a very short command sequence, maybe a couple of bytes and a checksum, too short to triangulate on. Then the AMIs are on their own.”

Now that was interesting. “In that case, he can only have one response tree going at a time, right?”

“Correct, unless he’s giving separate orders to different squads. And in that case, I think we’d have picked up on multiple transmissions.”

“Excellent.” I considered for a millisecond. “Attention everyone. We are going to split into groups, by the numbers, and execute strategies one through four. Let’s see how well the AMI pilots handle too many different scenarios. Verne and Surly, activate the radio jammers.”

Everyone acknowledged, and we split off in various directions, each vessel accompanied by its personal cloud of drones and busters.

For a wonder, it appeared to work. Some of the Brazilian AMIs seemed to be coping, but more of them became confused. There was a small group that would rush towards a Heaven contingent, stop, rush towards another one, then reverse and repeat. Gotta love AMIs.

And then Medeiros panicked. Unable to regain control of his drones, he cranked up his radio transmission power and attempted to outshout the jammer. He might as well have put on a hat with a flashing red light. Verne and Surly immediately released the death squad—a batch of busters specifically programmed to latch onto the Medeiri with SUDDAR and not to let go until they were space junk. The death squad shot forward at close to forty G, and I imagined them yelling “Wheee!” in high-pitched minion voices.

In next to no time the death squad surrounded the Medeiri—there were two Brazilian vessels—and destroyed them. However, this time we were going to be thorough. As soon as they got the recall order, the busters took off after the Brazilian drones. There would be no peace until every piece of Brazilian equipment in the system was obliterated.

* * *

It took a further eighteen hours to track down every fusion signature in the system. I took a video call from Elmer.

“Looks clear now. Anything still alive will have gone to ground. Time to implement phase three?”

“You bet, Elmer.” Again I switched to command channel. “Okay, everyone. Phase three. Surly, release the hunter-seekers.” I heard several snickers, hastily suppressed. Dune didn’t have a particularly good reputation among the Bobs.

The hunter-seekers were essentially drones optimized for long-distance searching. Their SUDDARs were able to reach to almost four light hours. By overlapping search fields, they could get increased definition of anything they ran across. It would take a week, but they would cover every inch of the star system, identify any refined metal up to a kilometer deep underground, and relay that information to busters for remedial action.

Meanwhile, we examined the battle records.

“That’s an Alpha Centauri Medeiros,” Hank said.

“You sure?”

“Absolutely.” Hank pulled up images of the 82 Eridani Medeiros group from our first battle, then images of the Alpha Centauri Medeiros group as recorded by Calvin and Goku.

The differences were subtle, but the two probes were definitely based on slightly different designs. It came as no surprise that the Brazilians would have worked on improvements even as they were building and launching probes. Apparently the first and second probes to leave Earth had been—Oh, hold on. That would require three different launches from Earth. One to Epsilon Eridani to fight Bob-1, one to Alpha Centauri, and one to 82 Eridani. Sure enough, my memory of Bob’s Medeiros was yet a third design variant.

That meant that we couldn’t depend on our estimates of the total Medeiri in the universe.

Life just sucked, sometimes.

I announced this information to the squad, and got the expected groans.

“Okay, guys. Looks like Medeiros will continue to be our Snidely Whiplash, showing up in every episode to set traps and twirl his mustache. But meanwhile, we have this system. Let’s split up and finish the survey. You know that there are colony ships on the way to Vulcan that can be redirected here with minimal delay. We want to get that word to them as soon as possible, if it’s warranted. And let’s keep in mind that Bill wants tech samples. We’re looking especially for cloaking technology and fission bomb designs.”

This was something all the Bobs could get behind enthusiastically. War was something we did reluctantly and only by necessity. Exploration, well… that was fun.

* * *

“Wow, Milo really did hit the jackpot.” Verne grinned from ear to ear as he popped up survey results.

The rest of us nodded, grunted, or muttered “hell yes” according to our temperaments. This was indeed a major find. Two habitable planets, one to the inside edge of the habitable zone, and one to the outside edge. The outer planet had two moons, one of which was also habitable, although barely. The air was very thin—it would be like living in the Andes. You’d need to acclimate over time.

Except that Bill had taken on terraforming as a hobby…

I grinned at the thought, producing quizzical looks from some of the others. The moon’s atmosphere would outgas over geological timescales, but we could replenish it over human timescales. It would require ongoing maintenance, but it had been a long time since humanity had just accepted the environment as we found it.

We bumped up the priority on biocompatibility analysis. If everything checked out, this could be worth redirecting in-flight colony ships for.





51. Wedding

Howard

April 2195

Vulcan

The bride was beautiful. The groom was French. And I wanted to be drunk. I even talked to Bill about modifying the VR. He told me to quit being an idiot.

And idiot is what I was being. Hello? Earth to Howard. Computer, remember? I was on my best behavior, wished them well, made small talk, and left as soon as I could.

I made a call to one of two lawyers doing business in Landing. Yes, lawyers. Some things you just can’t get rid of.

Ms. Benning picked up right away. “Good afternoon, Mr. Johansson. I have the paperwork completed, and everything has been properly filed. We just need a few signatures from the other two parties, and everything will be legal.”

I nodded. “Any issues with me not being, um, human?”

“Nothing is ever settled in law, as you may well know.” She smiled into the phone. “But filing two sets of paperwork, one based on you having a legal standing and one based on the converse, should take care of any but the most determined challenges.”

“Thank you. Forward the paperwork to the Brodeurs. I’ll make sure they sign it and return it promptly.”

I hung up the phone and sighed deeply. Once they signed the papers, Mr. and Mrs. Brodeur would own 100% of the distillery. It would be my wedding present to them. Plus, it would leave me with no ties to Vulcan. And that would be good.

* * *

Dexter popped into my VR, raised his coffee in salute, and sat down. He had escorted Exodus-7 to Vulcan and had taken my offer to stay on as resident Bob.

He appraised me without speaking for several milliseconds. I waited, content with the silence.

“So, you’re joining the freakin’ Foreign Legion. Could you be any more cliché?”

I laughed. I couldn’t help it. “I guess I am. On both counts. What’s it to ya?”

“I thought being a replicant meant all that was behind us.”

“Maybe in a hundred years, Dexter. Or maybe a thousand. They’re ephemerals. I’m just going to make a point of remembering that.” I gestured vaguely at the star map I’d been perusing. “And I’m outta here. Sam from Exodus-3 envied me being able to stay in one place and watch it grow, now you get to try it for yourself. I want to go see what’s out there.”

Dexter nodded slowly. “I’ve been reading your blog. Good detail. It shouldn’t be too hard to step in. Have you picked a target system yet?”

“Not really. I’ve got several likely looking targets. We’re far enough away from the Others that it isn’t an immediate concern. I’ll probably just flip a coin.” I leaned forward. “First, I have one last set of goodbyes to take care of. You’ve got the keys, Dexter. Good luck.”

Dexter stood, nodded to me, and popped out. The parting wasn’t as final with the Bobs, of course. I’d still be available by SCUT if I kept my tau low enough, and I’d be available in any case once I reached my destination.

Now for the hard part.

* * *

Stéphane passed the documents back and forth from hand to hand as if they were burning him. His gaze kept shifting, to everywhere except my image on the phone. Bridget looked as though she was fighting back tears. I couldn’t tell if she was just upset about me leaving, or if she suspected some of the reasons.

“It’s not the distillery, Howard,” Stéphane said. “It’s a generous thing you do. The company is becoming one of the biggest on Vulcan. But why? Not even why leave, but why give it up?”

“Like I said, Stéphane, it’s a wedding gift. I really have no need for money, and I think it’s easier if I cut all ties.”

Stéphane nodded and stood silently for a few moments. Then he looked at the phone—finally—and said, in almost a whisper, “I will miss you, mon ami.” He exchanged a look with Bridget, and she nodded, once. He took the papers and, without looking back, left the room.

Bridget hesitated for a moment, then came over and sat down in front of the phone. “Howard, when you introduced Stéphane and I, isn’t this what you had in mind?”

Okay, then, no pretense. “I didn’t have anything in mind, Bridget. Just wanted to have my two besties in the room at the same time, I guess. Seems to have worked.”

Bridget jerked back slightly, a hurt look on her face. It was a petty thing to say, and I was immediately sorry. “Look, Bridget, I didn’t have some master plan. Apparently, I didn’t even have a clue. I guess it took me this long to really get that I’m not human. I’m not part of the dance anymore.”

“You’re human, Howard. Where it matters. I wish I’d met you when you were still alive.”

“Me too.” I paused the appropriate amount of human time. “I guess I’d better go. Places to go, species to meet…”

She smiled, gave me a small wave, and disconnected. Just before the image blinked out, I saw her eyes well up.





52. Bullwinkle

Bill

December 2195

Epsilon Eridani

I was touring the Ragnarök landscape in Bullwinkle when I got a ping from Garfield.

I sent an IM back. “What’s up?”

Garfield responded on audio only. I hadn’t implemented head’s-up visuals yet, and I didn’t want to exit the moose.

“Report’s back from 82 Eridani.”

Well, that would be interesting no matter how it had ended up. Come to think of it, the fact that someone was still alive to report back limited the extent to which the news could be bad. I tried to focus on that thought. I shut down Bullwinkle and called the transport drone to come and get him.

It took a moment to refocus myself in my regular VR. Garfield was sitting at the table, swiping through a report.

“Well?”

Garfield leaned back and grinned. “It’ll take a while to go through everything, and they’re still consolidating, but it’s looking damned good. A couple of the guys are checking biocompatibility. Unless there’s something really poisonous, we have three new colony targets.”

He reached forward and popped up a couple of items in separate windows. “Then there’s this. One of the advantages of using busters as a weapon is there’s lots of wreckage to examine. Loki thinks he may already be getting a handle on the cloaking stuff.” Garfield’s grin looked like it was becoming permanent. “We’ve also got a couple of unexploded fission bombs. The guys will be very careful, of course, but we think a V4 SUDDAR pulse might be able to get us a scan without setting off a booby trap.”

“Excellent.” I sat down and requested a couple of coffees from Jeeves. I was silent for a moment, scrubbing my face with my hands. “The thing is, Gar, even with this stuff we can’t do more than delay and annoy the Others. The more I see of them, the bigger and more invincible they look. Their population, based on the latest models, could easily be a couple of hundred billion. They could field a space navy that would just roll over us, if we really pissed them off.”

Garfield nodded, a morose expression on his face. After a short silence, he looked up at me. “How’s it going with Bullwinkle? I notice you no longer have a drone following.”

“Yeppers.” I was glad to change the subject. “Improvements in miniaturization, local processing, better comms. I still need a large body, but it’s coming down gradually. Not quite to the point of a human body yet.”

“Still too big for Rocky?”

“Afraid so, buddy. Working on it, though.”

“So what’s your ultimate goal?”

“To walk in and punch Cranston right in the nose.”

Garfield threw his head back and laughed.

* * *

We settled into the pub, beers and coffees scattered around the tables. Another game of Scrub, another reminder that I was never an athlete. I grinned at the thought. At least there were no jocks around to rub it in anymore.

Monty parked himself at my table and took a tentative sip of his beer. I’d recently introduced a new dark beer that I thought was a serviceable substitute for Guinness. I watched him carefully.

Monty stared at the glass for a moment, nodded, and took a deeper sip. Success! I messaged Guppy to add the beer to the menu.

“Hey, Monty, how’s things up Poseidon way?”

Monty raised the glass in my direction. “Pretty good, actually, Bill. We had a couple of bad months where the krakens started hanging around a lot, hoping for a meal, but the new underwater defenses seem to be gradually changing their minds.”

“But you’re still going ahead with the floating city plans.”

“Oh, sure.” Monty shrugged. “No matter what you do, living on a floating plant mat is still going a little more native than most of the colonists are comfortable with. Proper cities will mean permanent construction, transit, and all the amenities that we like to call civilization.”

“And you’ll be out of there.”

He laughed. “Yeah, you caught me. As soon as they have enough infrastructure and redundancy to handle their own destiny, I’m heading out. I’ve had enough of shepherding humans, y’know?”

I smiled at him, but his comments worried me.

New Bobs were increasingly voicing an unwillingness to hang around and help humanity. On top of the tendency to use dismissive language, it told me that there was some kind of shift in psychology going on.

Then I admitted to myself that I might be the one out of step. I’d been holed up at Epsilon Eridani for fifty years, with only second-hand exposure to humanity. It was easy for me to have an attitude. Bobs cloned from Riker’s tree might just be getting heartily sick of people.

Anyway, there were still enough interested Bobs to keep things rolling. I decided not to worry about it. I could always start my own dynasty if I needed to.

I looked around for Howard, but didn’t see him. The moot directory indicated he hadn’t shown up today. Now there was a case of going too far in the other direction. The man was head over heels over a human. Everyone but Howard could see it. Had Original Bob ever been that naïve? I sighed. Yeah. He had.

Riker was surrounded by a group of Bobs, being grilled on the situation on Earth. The results from 82 Eridani would certainly have caused a stir with the enclaves. I had a TODO to talk to Will about it myself, but I wasn’t going to wade into that scrum. It could wait.

Marvin and Luke came over and joined Monty and me.

“Hi, Bill. Sorry to be a pest…”

“S’okay, Marv. I understand. No, still nothing from Bender. Sorry. Unless he decided to pull a Mario and head for the far reaches, I think the greatest likelihood is that something happened to him.”

Marvin looked downcast, and Luke nodded and looked away. Those three were from the same cohort, so they were related in a way that was somehow one step closer than mere clonedom. It was now coming up on thirty years since Luke and Bender left Delta Eridani. The chances of an innocent explanation for Bender’s silence became smaller every year.

Marvin laced his fingers together and put his forehead to them for a moment. “Victor followed Bender’s departure vector. So far, nothing. He thinks Bender may have changed direction at some point. Victor’s not willing to backtrack, so we’re thinking of mounting an expedition.”

My eyebrows rose. “Going after him? Space is pretty big. What do you think your chances are?”

Luke leaned forward, arms encircling his drink. “You know we leave a trail when we fly between systems. The gas is slightly thinner along the flight path of a Heaven vessel where we’ve scooped it up. It’s not much, and you have to be very careful, but even if he changed course mid-flight we should be able to follow his new vector.”

“Okay. You know where he was aiming when he left Eden. I guess you just start with that?”

Marvin and Luke nodded in sync.

It would take decades, if not centuries. Then I smiled. Still thinking like an ephemeral. How long it would take was irrelevant. We had forever.





53. Testing

Hal

April 2196

GL 877

I wasn’t really what you’d call “happy” to be back. Last time I was here, I had died. Hopefully things would go better this time.

I did a quick status check on my cloud of attendants. I was surrounded by just under a hundred drones and one AMI-driven Heaven decoy vessel.

The decoy obediently matched my actions as I decelerated. The drones scattered to preassigned positions around the periphery of the star system. They would serve as an early-warning system for any comings and goings by the Others. They were designed to give as little evidence of their presence as possible. Low profile, no albedo to speak of, total radio silence, and heavily shielded reactors meant they showed very little footprint to the universe at large. And booby-trapped, of course. If the Others ever got hold of SCUT tech, we would be royally hooped.

The decoy had been constructed with all the improvements suggested by Thor: two layers of depleted uranium alternating with two layers of electrostatic shielding. We’d added redundancies for every major control system, with automatic failovers. It also had multiple independent self-destruct mechanisms and the usual booby-traps.

My new body had some improvements as well. I’d sacrificed buster storage in favor of a larger reactor and SURGE drive. At 15 G capability I could now outrun the Others, assuming that I’d seen their “A” game last time out.

Today’s entertainment was in aid of testing our mods against the death asteroid. If Decoy-1 could survive a zapping, we were golden. If it couldn’t… well, no one really wanted to ask that question.

I sent the activation order. Decoy-1 broke off from my vector and accelerated towards the inner system.

* * *

The SCUT connection gave me a video window into the chase. The decoy was carefully sticking to 10 G as it ran from the Others’ battle-group, or squad, or whatever they called their standard collection of ships. We hadn’t tried to be subtle with the sweep through the inner system, and the decoy had, predictably, picked up a tail. It looked as though we were less than an hour away from the big event.

I accepted a ping, and Mario popped into my VR. “I love car chases,” he said, grinning at me.

“Especially the ones with big crashes,” I replied.

I was forwarding the telemetry to Bill for the archives as well. I hadn’t heard from him, but I imagined he was monitoring as time permitted. Mario got comfortable, Jeeves brought coffees, and we sat back to watch the show.

Two minutes later the death asteroid zapped the decoy, just as the decoy had finished a SUDDAR scan of its pursuers. The decoy forwarded a complete set of readings to us, then blew itself up.

Mario and I looked at each other, our eyes wide. I spoke first. “That was, uh, a little early.”

“Yeah, looks like Garfield was a bit off on his estimates of the internal capabilities of the death asteroids. He’s going to have to rejigger his models.”

I checked the received telemetry. “Well, fortunately, we got a good scan just at the end. This should help.” I took a close look at the scan of the death asteroid. “Or not. Look at that.” I pointed to a section of the scan. “That looks like living area. Why the crap would they need that much living area?”

Mario thought for a moment. “Either they’re really really big, or the death asteroid requires a lot of personnel to run, or they really really like each other. Like naked mole-rats or something.”

“Huh. Questions and more questions. Well, we’ve got this much done, anyway. The decoy took a few hit points, but by and large I’d say the shielding was a success.”

Mario nodded. “We’ll see what Thor and Garfield have to say at the next moot.” He raised his cup to me, finished his coffee in a gulp, and popped out.

I turned myself around, pointed the bow at GL 54, and headed home.





54. Stuff is Happening

Hal

October, 2197

En Route to GL 54

I was eighteen months into my journey when I got a message from Bill. At my current tau, any kind of real-time interaction was out of the question. I couldn’t frame-jack nearly high enough to overcome the time dilation. So communications tended to wait until the end of a trip, or they came as emails, as in this case.

I grabbed the sheet and read it.

Hal;

Well, the fecal matter seems to have struck the atmospheric propulsor. A squad of Others vessels was detected leaving GL 877, heading for GL 54. To be fair, scouting by other Bobs indicates that other, closer systems have already been stripped, so this isn’t necessarily anything more than a normal scavenging mission. Just the same, Mario has decided to hit the road, along with every piece of equipment he has.

We’re going to leave a couple of drones behind for observation, and use one to try communicating with the Others. If they react by pointing one of the death asteroids at us, we’ll blow up the drone.

Just thought you should know. It looks like we’re heading for a formal First Contact. You may want to re-route.

Bill



Oh, fudge. May you live in interesting times. Mm, hmm.





55. Contact

Bill

October 2204

GL 54

Mario was now in mid-trip, fleeing GL 54 for Zeta Tucanae, so it was up to me to handle the introductions when the Others arrived. I couldn’t help but feel a certain level of nervousness. These were the beings that had blown up Bashful and Hal. There were a lot of ways this could go down, but I didn’t think friendly was in the expected range.

Before he left, Mario did a little preparatory construction. He had four stealth drones set up for observation, and a non-stealth drone for making contact. With SCUT communications, I could easily control them from here in Epsilon Eridani.

The contact drone made me chuckle. The hull was shiny, the reactor leaked neutrons like a sieve, and in the radio spectrum the drone was as noisy as an unshielded electric motor. I thought he might have overdone the hee-yuk, but it was certainly a masterpiece. It also had an antenna dish for tight-beaming radio telemetry to a non-existent mother-ship, which I thought was a great touch. We wanted the Others to underestimate us, right up to the moment we would deliver the knock-out punch.

The Others’ convoy was impressive. Ten death asteroids, a couple hundred small attendants, and twenty huge cylindrical hulks that I assumed would be cargo ships. These last units were upwards of ten kilometers in length and a kilometer in diameter. I tried to estimate the tonnage of metals that they could transport and my mind boggled at the results.

Interestingly, though, based on a rough calculation, the total cargo capacity was within an order of magnitude of what they’d need to strip this system. Either they had previously scouted the system, or they had some way to get a good estimate of available resources beforehand. Or maybe they just lucked out. They might make multiple trips if a system had enough resources to justify it.

Well, that was something for the future. I activated the communications drone, placed it right in the path of the incoming armada, and squirted a radio signal at them. For a first attempt, it was the most basic of communications: the first ten prime numbers, represented as a series of blips. Then I waited for a response. I had listed a number of possibilities while waiting for them to arrive. It might be the next ten primes, or it might be my message relayed back to me in reverse, or it might be another mathematical series. Or it might be a blast of cosmic rays.

I was not expecting an audio message, in Mandarin.

Fortunately I had a translation routine on file, such things having been fairly standard issue in the twenty-second century.

We see you, food. Your time is not yet. Move aside.

“Well, blow me down. Food, am I?” I was so flummoxed that it took me almost a half-second to come up with a response. It occurred to me during that time that I shouldn’t react too quickly. If they thought I was biological, so much the better.

“We are not attempting to block you. This unit is obviously too small for that. We are trying to communicate.”

To what purpose? To beg for mercy? An interesting idea, mercy. We learned it from the cybernetic unit that we captured. We have no such concept.

“Do you have a concept of exchange of information?”

If it benefits us.

Well, that was something, anyway. Based on Hal’s experience, I had a couple of minutes before they were close enough to zap the drone. Assuming they were going to do so, which I figured was a pretty safe bet.

“Why are you stripping systems?”

For resources and food. Is this not obvious?

“Yes, but why not just colonize the star systems?”

Another concept that we learned from the captured unit. Colonization requires splitting the hive. Splitting the hive means a new Prime. A new Prime and another hive means war. This does not benefit us. Better to simply collect resources so that the hive can grow.

Oooookaaaaaay. A picture was forming—something insect-like. Prime was probably some equivalent to a queen.

I noted that they were coming up past the position of one of the stealth drones. These units were equipped with the new four-light-hour ultra-low-power SUDDAR units. I hoped to get a scan without alerting them.

“Can Primes not cooperate?”

Sub-Primes can be controlled, but not over interstellar distances. We know you are using this dialog to probe for information. This amuses us. The scurrying of food as it evades the inevitable end is perhaps for us what you mean by “art.”

Okay, that was just sick.

“We seek information. Sometimes even if there is no benefit.”

That makes no sense.

“The beings at Zeta Tucanae. You obliterated them.”

They were food. And they would have tried to prevent the harvesting.

“Is there no way we can co-exist? The universe is a large place.”

That also makes no sense. You are food. It is not the purpose of food to co-exist.

We will, in time, make our way to your Sol and your Epsilon Eridani. We have seen your radio beacons. Food always thus announces itself.

Oh, wow. Fermi paradox, resolved.

I checked my system status and noted that my drone was probably thirty seconds away from getting zapped. I decided to try and time the SUDDAR scan to coincide with that, in hopes that the zap might either command all their attention, or blind their systems for a few moments.

“You are building what we would call a Dyson Sphere. Is this for your population?”

Yes. The construct will allow up to five hundred million times the livable area. We will not run out of space within the lifetime of the Prime.

“And afterwards?”

Irrelevant. That is the concern of the next Prime.

“Isn’t overpopulation a concern? Overcrowding?”

There can never be too many of us. There can only be not enough food.

At that moment, the stealth drone detected the outgoing zap. The Others’ spokesman hadn’t even bothered with a throwaway line or anything. I was absurdly irritated. You’d think I’d deserve at least “Hasta la vista.”

Per instructions, the stealth drone did a quick series of snapshot scans of the Others’ vessels.

Then the zap arrived, and the communications drone exploded on cue. I noted, from the point of view of the stealth drone, that a squad of Others immediately took off in the direction that the communication drone’s directional antenna had been transmitting. Served them right. Let ’em waste time casting around.

I sat back and stared into space. This was big. This was going to need a moot for sure.





56. Descendants

Bob

January 2183

Delta Eridani

Buster grunted as he released the arrow. It flew dead true and buried itself in the target. Archimedes whooped from the sidelines, and Buster’s little brother and sister yelled insults. Another universality, apparently.

Buster turned to his opponent, Arnold’s son, and waggled his ears. Donald looked distinctly uncomfortable, but wasn’t going to back down in front of the entire hexghi.

Donald released the arrow. It hit the edge of the target. Not a kill shot, but certainly crippling, if it had hit a live target. Arnold shrugged and yelled something supportive.

I took a moment to smile at the number of new faces that had grown up over the last few years. Child mortality had dropped significantly with the reduction in the gorilloid threat, and the Deltan population was up to over eleven hundred.

Archimedes’ family had grown as well. Three children, and a fourth on the way. I was finally beginning to get an idea of the lifespan of the Deltans. Moses had died a few years ago, at somewhere between sixty and seventy Earth-years old. About the same or maybe even a little better than humans, given the environment.

It was a bittersweet time for me. The council had never relented in their decision to banish me. Archimedes brought it up a couple of times, but was shut down hard. His position as the tribe’s premiere tool maker protected him to a certain extent, but I finally told him to drop it. I didn’t want any backlash against his family.

Stories of The Bawbe still abounded, but I noticed that they were now being embellished. In particular, my reputation seemed to be suffering. The tone sounded a little more like Loki or Lucifer, these days. Would I end up as the devil in some far-future religious myth?

I sighed. The risks of godhood, I guess.

I sent a quick text to ask Marvin if he’d be joining today’s scrub game, and got an affirmative.





57. Moot

Bill

October 2204

Epsilon Eridani

I held the air-horn over my head and pressed the button twice. And received the usual round of boos. Gotta love tradition.

The catcalls were short-lived, though, more of a formality. The word had gotten out, and the Bobs were all business today. Even the pre-meeting session had been quiet, with a growling undertone.

“First, before we get to the main event, I’d like to introduce our newest long-range champion…” I gestured to a nearby Bob. “Bruce is from Calvin and Goku’s first cohort. He is calling in from 11 Leonis Minoris, and holds the record at thirty-seven light years from Earth. Sorry, Mario.”

The crowd applauded Bruce, and several people came over to talk to him. When the chatter had died down, I held the air-horn up for a moment and waited for quiet.

“I guess you’ve all heard by now, but I’ll summarize just to make sure we haven’t missed anything. We have communicated with the Others. They appear to have captured the Chinese probe at some point, and stripped its data. The good news is that they speak Mandarin, so communications were pretty straightforward. The bad news is they know where Earth is. And thanks to my ham-handed broadcasts to every star system in sight, they know about Epsilon Eridani as well.”

I waved off the yelled comments. “No, they won’t get the SCUT plans. The broadcasts were encrypted, as is everything we do; and the Chinese probe wouldn’t know anything about the transmission or file formats, so they wouldn’t be able to separate out encrypted data from transport envelope.”

I waited for any objections, then continued, “The other piece of good news is they are sufficiently arrogant that they don’t feel the need to come over and squash us forthwith. Their attitude seems to be that they’ll get to us when they get to us.”

This produced low growls from the audience, and I grinned. “Now, we got some good scans of the armada, and we’re able to observe their operations as they strip GL 54. I’m going to call up Garfield to give us a rundown in a minute. But first I want to thank Hal for successfully testing the new Heaven design against the death asteroids. At least in that area, we are ahead of the game.”

There were cheers from the audience, and the usual first verse of “Bicycle Built for Two.” It never got old. Hal grinned to the crowd, waved, and took a bow.

Garfield walked up onto the podium and glared at me. I laughed, held up the horn, and gave a blast.

“Okay,” Garfield yelled over the boos, “I have a bit of egg on my face. My guesstimates of the power capabilities and weaponry of the death asteroid were a little off, because the Others are actually more inventive than I thought. I just hope they don’t have more surprises.”

Garfield waited for silence, and he got it. Every Bob in the room was now completely focused on his words.

“Power beaming via SUDDAR. It’s not just for running those little ant-things they use for harvesting. It’s also for charging death asteroids remotely. The death asteroids are capable of charging themselves without help, but it looks like it would take about a day on their own. So they have huge reactors in the cargo carriers which, in combination with the SUDDAR beaming, can run ants, drones, mining carriers, or charge up death asteroids.”

“Why?” yelled someone from the crowd. “Seems unnecessarily complicated.”

Garfield nodded in the general direction of the voice. “I think it’s dictated by their biology. It’s pretty obvious from Bill’s conversation with them that they’re a hive organism. A large portion of the interior of the death asteroids is living space. Far too much, in my opinion, to be justifiable just based on personnel requirements. Every vehicle they have is either automated or has the same large living space. I think they need to live in large groups. They may get some version of agoraphobia or something if there aren’t enough of their brethren around.”

“Well, it would explain their decision to build the Dyson Sphere.” Hal said from the front of the audience.

“That and their comment about going to war with any splinter group,” I added. “That could be phenotypical behavior as well. These beings seem to be very much driven by their biology. It may be that their reference to all other life as ‘food’ is more of the same. Something that drives their actions at such an instinctual level can be taken advantage of, if we can figure out how. That’s one of the tasks I want you guys to take out of this meeting.”

There were silent nods throughout the room. And a palpable aura of anticipation. I’d tried to keep this quiet, but somehow word had gotten out.

“And now, the moment you’ve all been waiting for.” I grinned at the crowd. “We got images of the Others from the scans. The detail isn’t great, of course. The drone was too—”

“Less talk, more show!”

I snapped my mouth shut. So much for building the drama. With a wave, I brought up the composite 3D image that we’d put together.

There were oohs and aahs from the crowd. The Other was hard to describe, simply because it was hard to get a perspective on it. The scale superimposed on the image indicated that it was about four feet tall, although it didn’t really stand straight. Color shaded between an oily green-violet sheen through gray, to black.

I looked at the perplexed faces in the crowd. I understand that look. I’d worn it recently. But I’d been examining all the images since we separated them from the scans, so I had somewhat of a head start on figuring it out.

“Okay, think of the posture of a gorilla. Not quite a quadruped, but not quite upright. These things that look kind of like meaty wings are the front, er, limbs. The back limbs are more like a split tail, except that there’s also a tail. Visualize a sea lion’s back end with a tail tacked on. The front limbs have these big appendages that look like fat fingers, but I don’t think they’re for manipulating. They have suckers on them, so I think they’re more for gripping their prey. The creature has what I’d have to describe as feeding fingers that fold out from here…“ I pointed to the front of the thing, “… and appear to be dexterous enough to act as manipulators. They also direct food into the maw…” I switched to another image which showed the thing with its front split open in a vertical slash. “… which doesn’t masticate so much as grind and strip the meal. I think it would be particularly slow and painful to be eaten by these things.”

I switched images again and pointed to the front. “The head does appear to have the primary sensory apparatus, although what looks like the brain is more centrally located, here.” I pointed to a spot high on the main trunk. “Vision is not great. It seems to be a large number of small eyes spaced around the dome of the head. You have to wonder why a predator would need 360-degree vision.”

I switched back to the first picture. “The scan indicated they were packed into the living area with a density similar to us in this room. Except that it was like that everywhere. No empty rooms. No private quarters. They are probably always packed in like sardines.”

I gestured dramatically. “Ladies, er, gentlemen, I give you— the Others.”

There was dead silence for a few milliseconds, then someone said, “Should we clap?”

Everyone in the room broke up in laughter, and the tension dissolved. If I ever found out who the speaker was, I’d have to buy him a beer.

I left the image up, and closed the meeting. People broke into groups to discuss the presentation. Mario raised his chin in my direction, and I acknowledged the implied invitation with a wave.



Mario grimaced. “I had a theory that the presence of the death asteroids was proof that they don’t scout a system. Otherwise they’d have known they didn’t need them at GL 54.”

“Mm, but if they’re a communal organism, then the death asteroids are their portable community.”

Mario gave me a rueful smile. “Yep. Fail.”

“So how is the harvest going?”

He rolled his eyes and pulled up some images. “Thankfully there was nothing in GL 54 to get attached to, so this is nothing more than a strategic retreat to me.” Pointing to one image. “The carriers go down where presumably they’ve detected metal. They disgorge ants, who dig down to the ore and bring it up. It’s hard to tell from a distance, but based on activity, I think they use the ore to build more ants which they use to get more ore, which they use to build more ants… Eventually they reach a break-even point of some kind where the ants just haul material up. Then they harvest the excess ants and take off.”

“They’d have printers specialized for making ants, then.” I stroked my chin in thought. “It would have to be a cheap, quick process.”

“At the current rate, I estimate they’ll have the system cleaned out in a year. It’s exponential behavior. They never stop, never rest.” Mario rubbed his eyes. “And those cargo ships are so big, I don’t think we could even make them notice us, let alone damage them significantly. It would be like mosquitos trying to take on tanks.”

“Well, we have to come up with something before they decide Earth is next.”

Mario shook his head. “There are a lot of systems closer to them than Earth. We have lots of time.”

“You’re assuming that they always do things that way. You’re assuming that they won’t suddenly decide to drive a little extra distance for some ready-made refined material.” I glared at him, willing him to get the point. “I think we have to assume we don’t have a lot of time. If we’re ready early, no biggie. If we’re ready late, biggie.”

“Damn.”





58. News

Howard

July 2198

Interstellar Space

I was less than a third of the way to my destination when I received an email from Dexter. In a moment of weakness, I’d asked him to let me know any news about the Brodeurs.

Dexter included a bunch of other stuff in the email as well. Maybe he wanted to distract me; maybe he wanted to it to seem like the message wasn’t all about Bridget. Don’t know, but I appreciated the effort.

In any case, it looked like things were going well, in general. Butterworth had retired—well-deserved, in my opinion. The population of the system was up around a hundred thousand people now. Human-crewed spaceships were becoming commonplace, and the donuts made up an increasingly minor part of the food supply chain. Dexter apparently now had some of that formerly mythical free time, and was putting together some of Bill’s asteroid movers.

New Jerusalem was now a full-fledged democracy. Seemed some incriminating videos had gotten out and Cranston had to step down. In the resulting mess, the citizenry had decided to separate Church and State once again.

I laughed as I read the details. No doubt Cranston had his suspicions, but there was no way to trace anything back to Will or myself. Speaking of, I fired off an email to Will, in case he had more juicy info.

Things were going well. If it weren’t for the Others, humanity would be in a good place.

And that was it for the delaying tactics. With a sigh, I went on to the part about the Brodeurs.

Okay, not terrible. They had a son. They’d named him Howard.

I smiled, as the message became suddenly blurry. I would have to send a short thank-you note.





59. Another One

Bill

April 2205

Epsilon Eridani

I leaned back in my chair, looked straight up, and used some words that I normally don’t like to use.

Surveillance drones around GL 877 had reported that the Others had just launched another expedition. From the initial vector, it looked like they were heading for NN 4285. That wasn’t too bad—it was a small M star, too dim for any chance of usable planets.

No, I corrected myself: under no circumstances should this be considered acceptable. If the Others had stuck to uninhabited systems, well, it was a big galaxy. But that wasn’t their behavior. If they didn’t happen to kill off a planet, it was only because there was nothing to kill off, not because of some moral reluctance. Lack of opportunity isn’t the same as self-restraint. They were evil. End of story.

And if distance was an indicator, both Gamma and Delta Pavonis would probably be next, and they were good candidates. I checked the archives, just on the off chance. No such luck. No one had visited those systems yet, although a couple of Bobs were heading for them as part of Mario’s scouting.

I got up and started pacing around my office. Then I pinged Mario, and he popped over.

“What’s up?”

“Mario, the Others just moved again. This time heading for NN 4285.”

“Yeah, I saw that. Not a prime system.”

“Still, we have to figure out how to nip this in the bud. I’m concerned about the Pavonis candidates. Do you have an ETA for them?”

“Gamma and Delta? Claude and Jacques are heading for those. Claude will be at Gamma in about a month, and Jacques at Delta in twenty-two months or so.”

“Dammit. The closest significant presence we’ve got is Sol, and we can’t divert them from building colony ships.”

“Epsilon Indi?”

“No, Epsilon Indi is too far away as well, although closer than Sol. But resources are poor, and colonists to KKP will be too busy setting up to help.”

Mario nodded. He looked down at his toes for a few milliseconds, then turned and glared at me. “What is it with the Pavonis systems that’s giving you a pickle up your butt, anyway?”

I sighed and stopped pacing. I favored Mario with a self-conscious smile. “Call it a premonition. Call it superstition. Call it utter faith in the power of Murphy. Based strictly on distance, those two are among the next likely targets. Based on the stars’ types, they’re good habitable-planet candidates. Based on our experience so far, most good systems with a planet in the right place have life. Not intelligence, necessarily, but life.” I shrugged, letting Mario make the connection.

He was silent for a few moments, thinking. “On the other hand, they’ve just sent out an expedition to NN 4285, and the GL 54 expedition hasn’t made it back to their home system. How many armadas to you suppose they have?”

“Fair point. They don’t seem to have any real sense of urgency. I wonder how long a Prime lives.”

“So look, Bill, why don’t you build a group here and send it to the area?”

I shook my head. “Too far. I’ll do it if there’s no other way. We need to get an inventory of what Bobs are in what systems, so we can figure out what response is possible.”

Mario gave me a nod and popped out.

I pinged Claude. His return indicated he was down to a low tau, about 0.03. That wouldn’t affect communications at all, and was hardly worth adjusting frame rates for. He was open for company, so I popped in.

“Hey, Bill.”

“Claude.” I looked around at his VR. Not particularly anything. Tropical beach, cabana, deck chair. Could be Mexico, Hawaii, or some made-up location. I didn’t have any memories of a vacation like this, so I assumed the last option.

Claude was looking at me with slightly wide eyes. He was a generation removed from me, and it was funny how the Bobiverse was becoming hierarchical like that.

I materialized a deck chair of my own at sat down. “Been following the Others, Claude?”

“Yeah, I was at the moot. And I heard about NN 4285.”

“Okay, so here’s the thing. With the Others taking out GL 54, there’s no Bob-controlled system anywhere close to you. When you get to Gamma Pavonis, you have to assume you only have a couple of decades at most before the Others come visiting. You’re going to have to mobilize for war, essentially.”

Claude frowned. “A lot of assumptions in there.”

“Not as many as you’d think, and the assumptions are high probability.”

Claude sighed and resettled himself in his chair to face me squarely.

“Look, Bill. I get the whole thing about the Others, and they’re evil, blah blah. But why here, and why now? Why this particular line in the sand?”

“I’ll grant you there’s nothing unique about Gamma Pavonis to the limit of our current knowledge. But we have to start somewhere. Maybe we won’t be ready for them in time. Maybe they’ll swoop down on you in a decade and you’ll have to flee like Mario did. But at some point, we have to try. Why not here, and why not now?”

Claude gave me a wry smile. “Because here and now puts me in the crosshairs, thank you very much.”

I laughed. “Well, that’s why God invented backups.”

* * *

I popped back to my own VR, after extracting a promise from Claude that he’d get the system report on Gamma Pavonis to me on a priority basis. I checked Jacque’s tau, but he was still way up there. A conversation would take days, even if he frame-jacked.

I quickly went down my list of known manufacturing centers. There weren’t a lot. Most Bobs didn’t bother in most systems, other than building a space station. I remembered Bart, who was the last Bob that I’d talked to in Alpha Centauri.

I sent a quick ping to him, but it looked like he was between systems. Bart’s acknowledgement indicated a ridiculous tau. I’d be a few days even waiting for a response, never mind a conversation.

I queried the Alpha Centauri space station directly. The status report appeared in front of me in a window. Garfield came around and looked over my shoulder.

“No one there right now,” he said. “Looks like the last group left it uninhabited.”

“Well, we can’t force anyone to stay and play caretaker. It’s a free galaxy.” I ran a hand through my hair, then stopped and looked at my hand. That was Riker’s tic. I didn’t need to start that. “It looks like a full-power AMI, though. If I can get it to build a replicant matrix, I can load my backup and the new me can bootstrap up from there.”

“You’re going to load a backup across interstellar distances, with no Bob overseeing? Wow, dude.”

I shrugged. “No difference in principle. I’ll checksum the hell out of it before approving it for load.” I thought for another millisecond, then nodded. “I don’t have a choice, anyway. We can’t afford to ignore any potential source of Bobs. I’m afraid, like it or not, we’re going to war.”





60. Arrival

Claude

May 2205

Gamma Pavonis

Gamma Pavonis was an F8V class of star, which made it slightly bigger and barely hotter than Sol. The effect was a system with a comfort zone slightly farther out, but a sun that would look virtually indistinguishable from ours.

I paradoxically found myself hoping that I wouldn’t find anything in the comfort zone. The whole dialog with Bill had left me freaked out and ambivalent about what I might find. I would actually feel better if there was nothing in this system worth defending.

Well, you have to know that Murphy is listening for just exactly that kind of wish, so he can give you the shaft.

The planet sat at just over a hundred million miles out. A gorgeous, shining, blue and green marble with bands and swirls of white, orbited by one larger moon and three smaller ones. Damn.

I went immediately into orbit to determine if it included intelligent life. That would be a real kick in the pants. Fortunately, the planet failed—or passed, depending on attitude—the first, obvious tests. There was no radio traffic, no web of exhaust trails in the atmosphere, no satellites, and no sprinkle of lights on the night side.

That still left pre-industrial civilization, of course, but that would require a closer look. I sent a quick email off to Bill with results so far, then deployed the exploration drones. Mario had decided that the latest-version Heaven vessels would come with enough on-board assets so that we could investigate a system quickly. This meant mining and manufacturing operations could wait for later.

The drones took up polar orbits for a couple of passes, then swooped into atmosphere to check out interesting items.

I spent five days on observation and exploration. I didn’t want to screw this up. But finally, I felt confident enough to report my findings.

No intelligence. Thank God. But the ecosystem was as rich and varied as anything in Earth’s history. This was a planet with everything stacked in its favor. The right size, the right distance from a sun with good solar output but relatively low UV, good-sized moons, plate tectonics active enough to ensure consistent surface recycling—the list went on and on. This was an ideal colony target, except for the part where it was on the Others’ front porch.

Now I would have to move to phase 2. This system actually had a relatively low metallicity, at least according to the star’s spectral lines. Perhaps that was why the Others had rejected it in favor of the slightly more distant NN 4285. But the next star out, GL 902, was over two light-years farther than this one. I doubted the Others would bypass it again.

Well, low metallicity was a relative term. I was sure I’d still find more than enough resources for my purposes, even if it took a bit of work to find.

There was a ping from Bill, then he popped in.

“Hey Claude. I’ve been looking over your report. Sounds like a great planet.”

“And that’s the problem. It is a great planet. Great system. And if you’re right, due to be ‘harvested’ sometime in the next, what, hundred years?”

Bill looked down for a moment. “Mario has been getting reports back from Bobs hitting surrounding systems. Combined with his own observations in Zeta Tucanae and Beta Hydri, we’re able to make a rough estimate of a system every ten to twenty years.”

“So they’ve only been at this maybe a hundred years?”

“We don’t know how long they were working only within their system. It might have taken them a hundred years to get started. Maybe the first out-system harvest taught them a lot. Anyway, the point is, there are a lot of unknowns before they started regularly harvesting.”

Bill had popped up a star chart while he was talking, the various star systems flashing a tooltip as he mentioned them.

“Jacques will be arriving at Delta Pavonis in eighteen months. The positions of Delta Pavonis and GL 877 are about the same distance from you, so if we see the Others head your way, anything he launches from Delta will arrive here at the same time. So hopefully you’ll have reinforcements.”

I nodded. That was something, anyway.





61. Starting Over

Oliver

September 2205

Alpha Centauri

HIC71683-14. Damn. I’m not Bill anymore. Now I need a new name.

This had happened to me once before, as one of Bob-1’s first cohort, in Epsilon Eridani. Now I was a noob again, this time in Alpha Centauri.

I popped into Bill’s VR. “I hate you.”

Bill grinned at me. “Naw, you know the rules. New name, dude. ASAP.”

“Oliver. In keeping with the Bloom County theme.”

Bill nodded his approval. Oliver was a fun character and we’d liked him.

“One advantage of this arrangement, I guess, is that I know the whole plan already.”

Bill laughed and nodded. “Saves time.”

I stood up. “So, I’ll get to it. I may set up in competition with you, though. Wanna bet I get FTL first?”

“I’d be overjoyed if you did, Oliver. Everyone wins.”

I waved to Bill, and popped back home.

* * *

Both Alpha Centauri A and B had reasonable resource levels. Bart and crew had concentrated their efforts in A, but I needed to get things rolling quickly. It would be six months until my vessel was ready. At that point, I would start the autofactory in Alpha Centauri A to building Bobs on a crash basis, while I would fly over to Alpha Centauri B with another autofactory and set up there as well. At the top acceleration of a Version 4 vessel, it was less than a four-day trip.

Meanwhile, I would have to consider possible weapons against the Others. Busters could pass through the cargo ships or death asteroids multiple times and do little or no detectable damage. Nukes were effective, and the expedition to 82 Eridani had yielded some good information. We didn’t have time to figure out fission weapons from scratch. I regretted, a little, not having worked on that before. But only a little.

Plasma spikes, like busters, were simply too small. Not effective against the mega monster ships we would be going up against.

I needed either a large mass, a large explosion, or a lot of energy. Heat energy, electrical energy, gravitational, or momentum. Hmm, relativistic velocities. How fast could I accelerate things?

Hands behind my back, muttering in thought, I retired to my new mad-science lab.

* * *

I really had no idea what size of force I was going to need. However, there was very little downside to overdoing it, and a lot of downside to the converse. With that thought in mind, I decided to just go for everything I could manage.

Taking a lesson from Bob-1’s experience, I decided I would start by doubling my production capability. Accordingly, my first production run consisted entirely of new printers. I then assigned a couple of printers to do nothing but produce more printers, while the rest started working on drones. I was going to invest some up-front time in ramping up my capacity, which would hopefully pay off later.

It took almost two years before I was ready to start building actual Bobs. The speed at which a printer could produce an item was dependent partly on the size of the item, but also very much on the level of detail required. 3D printers delivered individual atoms using a number of tuned carbon nanotubes, each sized for specific elements. Building something like itself required the maximum level of detail and precision, as you had to place individual carbon atoms, one after another, with zero defects. This made 3D printers one of the most complex items that a 3D printer could be asked to build. Only something biological would be harder.

Anyway, finally, I was producing Bobs. After much discussion, Bill and I came up with a blueprint for a Version 5 Heaven vessel—a virtual dreadnaught compared to the original Heaven-1. I felt a little intimidated just looking at the plans.

Bill was still working on the SUDDAR cloaking from the 82 Eridani mission, but we knew enough about it to build around the requirement for now. I also put together a design for a stealth buster, very similar in overall structure to Medeiros’ stealth fission bombs.

Howard had managed to extract H-bomb blueprints from Butterworth. I guess the colonel considered the Others to be enough of a threat to override military secrecy. Unbelievable that they were still even thinking in those terms, with 99.9% of the human race gone.

Three years after waking up at Alpha Centauri, I had my first cohort of battle cruisers.





62. Departure

Mulder

November 2201

Departure

I put my hands behind my head and stretched as I reviewed the report that I would be sending to Bill and Riker. This would be my final report from Poseidon. Tomorrow, Monty would start the return trip to Earth, empty except for some biological samples. And I would point my bow and head for a new system, leaving Marcus as Bob-in-residence here.

I pinged Monty and Marcus and invited them over. They responded immediately.

“Hey, Mulder. I’m going to miss you guys,” Marcus said, looking at each of us.

“Yeah, I know,” Monty replied. “I wish I could keep it down below .75 C, but we can’t afford the extra transit time for a colony ship.”

Marcus looked a little down, so I gestured to my report to change the subject. “Things are looking good. Three mat colonies in full operation, and two floating cities getting close to complete.”

Marcus nodded. “And as of today, it’s three months since the last kraken attack.”

“Apparently they can be taught.”

Marcus grinned and invoked a Coke. “And then there’s this.” He popped up an image.

“What the ffff…” I squinted at the graphic. “Is that actually…”

“Aerial city, as in floating in the air. Yep.” He waved a hand. “Well, okay, it’s a small proof-of-concept prototype, but still… I’ve been putting this thing together for a while. Triple redundancy, all kinds of failsafes. Theoretically we should be able to lift something as big as your floating cities and keep it in the air indefinitely.”

“Unbelievable,” Monty said. “When will it be ready to test?”

Marcus grimaced. “Sorry, buddy. Not for another six months. You won’t be able to find out the results until you get back to Earth.”

“Well, that sucks. On the other hand, by the time I’m back online, the thing might be ready for prime time. This could get interesting.”

I nodded, not saying anything. This was a good argument for staying below .75, just to be able to follow the project. If this crazy idea of Marcus’s actually worked, it would change the game significantly.

* * *

Poseidon receded rapidly in the rear view as I accelerated out of the system. The goodbyes from Chief Draper and the friends that I’d made over the years stung more than I’d expected. It was very possible that some of those people would be dead by the time my tau dropped at the other end. Making friends with humans just didn’t seem like a good idea, on balance.

Riker pinged me and I invited him in.

“Hey, Mulder. Sorry I couldn’t get back to you before. It’s been that kind of millennium.” Will grinned at me.

“Especially the last week or so, I guess,” I replied, smiling back. I summoned Jeeves and he arrived with a coffee for Will.

“So what’s the status back at Sol?” I asked him.

“We have fourteen colony ships in active service now,” he replied. “Colonies at or soon to be at Vulcan, Poseidon, Epsilon Indi, and 82 Eridani. Things are looking up.”

“Or would be, if not for the Others.”

Will sighed. “Yeah, I know. 82 Eridani and Epsilon Indi, in particular, are close enough to be potentially in danger. We’re working on it.”

Yep. Just when you start to get ahead in the rat race, the universe delivers bigger rats.





63. The Pav

Jacques

February 2207

Delta Pavonis

I looked down from orbit at the sprinkles of light decorating the dark side of Delta Pavonis 4, realizing that there was a good chance these beings would be dead soon.

The, uh… well, Deltans was taken. Pavonians? No, that sucked. Pav for now, I guess. The Pav appeared to be well into their industrial age, probably equivalent to the Victorian era on Earth. They were pumping smoke into the atmosphere at a prodigious rate, setting the earliest stages for global warming. I sincerely hoped that in the fullness of time, they’d have the opportunity to get all bent out of shape about environmentalism.

I finished my initial survey, packaged up the results, and fired it off to Bill.

It took about ten minutes before I got a ping, and Bill appeared in my VR.

“Well, this sucks.”

I nodded. “Remember the days when we thought finding intelligence would be a good thing?” I leaned forward and put my head in my hands. “And I could end up being witness to the massacre of an entire species.”

Bill materialized an Adirondack chair—a little anachronistic in my VR, but whatever—and sat down. He sat in silence for a few milliseconds before replying. “Jacques, it’s very likely that Gamma will get hit first. That’s a full planetary ecology, but at least Claude hasn’t found any sentient life. And if the Others head that way, you’ll be able to help. Meanwhile, you need to start working the system and concentrate on building a bunch of Oliver’s dreadnaughts.”

I looked at him and shook my head. “No. Well, yes, but also no. I’ll build dreadnaughts, and I’ll be ready to help Claude, but I’m also going to try to build a couple of colony ships, using Riker’s design. With the experience he’s gained, I should be able to complete them in half the time. If the Others come a’knocking, I want to get some Pav off-planet. I’m not going to sit by while an entire race gets blown away.”

Bill stared at me, frowning, for several milliseconds. Then a smile slowly formed. “I can’t decide if you’re brilliant or a moron. I’ll think about it. It’s definitely a noble idea, Jacques, but maybe not doable. I think we’re due for a moot. Maybe we should run it through the group consciousness.”

I shrugged. The group could talk all they wanted. I knew what I had to do. Bill nodded to me and vanished.

* * *

Regardless of whether I went with Bill’s plan or mine, the first step was the same. Find resources, build autofactory. This system was metal-heavy, so I didn’t anticipate any kind of problem.

I turned to Guppy, who was waiting at parade rest, as usual. Funny, even several generations and versions away from Heaven-1, Guppy really hadn’t changed. Same fish-headed, deadpan, taciturn sidekick. But he got the job done.

“Guppy, we need autofactories, and soon. Send out everything we have to look for locations. Top priority, and don’t be subtle.”

Guppy nodded and went into command fugue. The ship shuddered as a cloud of scouts and drones took off in all directions. I was glad we were past the days when I’d have to personally fly the system with SUDDAR ranging in all directions. The improvements to SUDDAR and to the AMIs meant that even that part of the process could be delegated.

The order hadn’t included the planetary exploration scouts, as those would be useless for that task. And they were already planetside, anyway. I began to draw out a plan for concerted and organized accrual of information about the Pav.

* * *

The Pav looked for all the world like giant meerkats. They stood six feet tall or so when upright. They could walk bipedally, but for any kind of distance, they went down on all fours. I was having a little trouble getting used to the sight. Apparently, I’m a bipedalism bigot. Who knew?

The Pav wore clothing, but seemingly less for protection or modesty than for decoration and pockets, except in very cold climates. They were organized into countries or states, and seemed to use forms of government very similar to what humanity had come up with. Even their societies looked familiar. About the only real difference was the almost complete absence of monogamy. Pav seemed to organize into families of up to eight adults, generally evenly divided between genders. This created a somewhat different standard design for residences, but otherwise didn’t seem to have a large effect on society as a whole.

I picked one of the countries that resembled early America, selected one of the larger cities, and settled in for some dedicated research.

The absence of electronic media made for a bit of an inconvenience. However, I did find several bookstores. I managed to sneak in a couple of roamers, late in the evening. They took up positions in the shadows of the rafters and waited for closing time.

Then they started going through books. There wasn’t anything like a children’s section, but there were books for beginning readers, with illustrated alphabets. It took two nights to go through the entire contents of the stores.

Because a significant portion of the population was still illiterate, there were clubs set up where a Pav would read aloud from a book, while patrons ate or drank. Seemed like a very civilized idea to me. I stationed drones in the shadows of every reading club I could find, and made a point of scanning the books that were read at my earliest opportunity.

Within a month, I had a working vocabulary of the language of this country. The inhabitants, who called themselves Zjentfen, spoke a language that they called Tinozj.

Meanwhile, the mining scouts found more than enough resources to get going. As expected, this was a rich system. As with many star systems, an asteroid belt sat to the inside of the first Jovian, and the pickings were beyond easy. I set the printers to producing more printers first. I think we’d all learned a lesson from Bob—early reproduction of printers paid off in the long term.

I would wait for the Bob-moot, and hope that they’d have good suggestions for manufacturing allocations. But if their suggestions didn’t include colony ships to get some Pav off-planet, well, they could go jump.





64. Moot

Bill

March 2207

Epsilon Eridani

The airhorn’s blast brought the usual expressions of appreciation. I couldn’t bring myself to grin at the antics, though. This was going to be a tough meeting. The looks on everyone’s faces showed that they understood this.

“Okay, guys. Let’s summarize. The Others have kicked Mario out of GL 54 and they’re busily stripping the resources. They’ve launched another expedition heading for NN 4285. I’ve expressed concern that Gamma and Delta Pavonis are going to be next. And oh, look, there’s a habitable planet in one system and a civilization in the other.”

I looked at the sea of faces. Everyone was totally focused on my words. “Oliver in Alpha Centauri has come up with a latest and greatest battle-wagon design. He’s too far away to help Jacques and Claude, though, unless the Others hold off a lot longer than I really expect. Jacques is prepared to send reinforcements for Claude if it comes to that.”

“Or the other way around, if necessary.”

I looked for the owner of that comment. It was Jacques. I raised my eyebrow at him in an invitation to continue.

“Delta’s farther away from GL 877, so from that point of view, Gamma is a more likely target. Except that Delta has way higher metallicity, as can be seen plainly in the spectral lines. Maybe the Others will skip the closer system for the better system. They already bypassed Gamma once.”

I closed my eyes for a moment. An undercurrent of muttering passed through the room.

“It’s a point, Jacques. We won’t know until they move. We have full coverage around GL 877 now, so we can see any departures.” I motioned to Garfield, who was standing to one side of the podium. “Garfield will give us a rundown on weapons capability.”

Garfield stepped forward and gave an aborted wave to the crowd. He wasn’t in the mood, either.

“We have fission bombs, thanks to Medeiros. We have fusion bombs, or at least the plans, thanks to the USE and Colonel Butterworth. We’ve been able to size up the plasma spikes somewhat, but there’s a practical limit to the size of the magnetic containment. We’ve probably reached that. It’s enough for the smaller Others’ vessels, but not enough to seriously harm the death asteroids or cargo vessels.”

Garfield popped up a diagram. “We’ve got the basic concepts of the cloaking figured out, but we weren’t able to salvage enough hardware to see how the Brazilians were actually doing it. Which means we’re starting from scratch. This appears to have been another one of those accidental discoveries, so it’s not just a matter of hours thrown at the problem. We’re going to need some breakthroughs.”

Someone at the front commented, “Without the cloaking, we can’t get the bombs close enough to be effective. They’ll just zap them or shoot them down. I think it’s safe to assume the Others have things like missiles as well.”

“We can get the items close enough,” someone else responded, “if we transport them in the cargo hold of a battle-wagon.”

There was silence as everyone looked at each other. We all knew what that meant. The battle-wagon would be destroyed in the explosion as well.

“We could put AMIs in some battle-wagons and make them suicide bombers.”

I felt my eyebrows climb up my forehead. That was actually not completely idiotic. We’d have to think about how many dreadnaughts we’d staff with AMIs, though.

“Or SCUT-based remotes.”

I looked around. “Okay, who is that? Those are some good ideas. Maybe you should be on the committee.”

Someone stepped forward. It was Elmer. “No thanks. I’m just trying to spare my hide.” He grinned around at the audience and we finally got some laughter.

“There’s also relativistic ramming,” another voice interjected.

I shook my head. “We thought about that. It would have to be busters, or something that could be directed. And even so, you’d have to launch weeks before the encounter, and you’d have to plan it to intercept the enemy at the right place and the right time. Chances of getting it right are too low. Plus they’ll see the approach from a light-hour out with SUDDAR and they just have to dodge. The busters would have a ridiculous tau and wouldn’t be able to react quickly enough. If we forget about relativistic speeds and just stick to our normal ramming, they won’t even feel it. Or they’ll just zap ship-busters a couple dozen at a time with those big zappers.”

There was a short silence as everyone digested this.

We knocked around the weapons issue for a while, but soon realized we were all rehashing the same information. I ended the meeting, and we broke into groups. Technically, this was the social part of the get-together, but we’ve always been a workaholic. Each small crowd turned into a single-issue discussion group.

In one group, Jacques was doing an informal presentation on the Pav. I found Bob, Bob-1 that is, in the audience. I stepped up beside him; he nodded an acknowledgement and turned back to the presentation.

I wanted to say something to him about the Deltans—to commiserate, or express sympathy, see how he was doing, something. He was effectively banished from their society. He’d pretty much adopted the tribe as his family, and to be cast out like that couldn’t be easy.

But, you know, we are Bob. Smart, driven, and socially inept. I focused my attention on the presentation.

The Pav seemed, in many ways, to be very human. Okay, they were furry, had group marriages, and ran around on all fours. But other than that...

The Pav tended to a sort of natural socialism. They had social institutions for the less fortunate, but those seemed to be supported by private funding. And well supported, too. Pav governments, even the types that, on Earth, would have been heavily interventionist, tended to be lean and hands-off. On the other hand, the Pav were, by human standards, about as organized as a basket of puppies. I wondered what effect introducing Robert’s Rules of Order would have on them.

Jacques finished his presentation, got a round of applause, then the questions started. I grinned, nodded to Bob, and wandered off.

So many Bobs. So much intelligence in this room, if I did say so myself. So much control of resources, spread over a sphere that might be approaching a hundred light-years in diameter. And we couldn’t put together a plan to protect a single planet. With a grimace of self-loathing, I popped back to my own VR.





65. Grandpa

Bob

January 2195

Delta Eridani

Archimedes hovered like a nervous father as Belinda cleaned up her new pup. Buster smiled at him, but I could see an edge of irritation as well.

It’s the sacred duty of every parent to drive their kids crazy. Especially when they become grandparents. I grinned at the thought of my mother and father as grandparents, doing their best to make Andrea and Alaina insane. Then I had to wipe my eyes as the thought brought back a cascade of family memories. A quick frame-jack allowed me to get it together without missing anything.

Belinda handed the pup to her mother-in-law and started cleaning herself. Diana rocked the baby for a few moments—very likely another universal—then smiled at Archimedes.

It was a picture-postcard moment, if you could ignore the bat-ears and pig snouts and fur. And I wanted, more than anything I’d wanted in a long time, to be able to share in it. Archimedes and Buster would have been fine, but Diana would go screeching to the elders at the first sign of a drone. Damn, I disliked her.

In his forties, now, Archimedes still showed exceptional good health. He was, of course, the first generation of Deltans to grow up with the improved nutrition that The Bawbe’s inventions had brought to the tribe. But even so, he seemed to be aging slowly for a Deltan.

I thought of pestering Bill again about the androids, but he had so many projects on the go, not the least of which was the terraforming of Ragnarök. Bill was good-natured about it, but I had to believe that I was being a bit of a pain.

Just the same, he said he was close. A decade or two at most. It just wasn’t a priority. I suppose I could offer to help out, but realistically the Deltans and the armaments project still occupied most of my time. And anyway, no one likes a kibitzer.

I pulled out of the surveillance drone, and picked another that was spying on Caerleon, the new Deltan village. Caerleon was situated in another of the old abandoned village sites—not surprising, since whatever made it a good location the first time would still hold true. With the reduction in gorilloid populations and alteration in gorilloid behavior, the village was a good deal safer now. I smiled sadly at the thought. That was the result of my efforts, and they couldn’t take that away from me.

Caerleon sat at the top of a rise, barely classifiable as a hill. But the thin soil prevented trees from growing there, resulting in a nice open space. Good for living, and easy to defend.

I found myself constantly worried, though, about relations between Caerleon and Camelot. The establishment of the second village had been peaceful in that no one got stabbed on the way out. But the acrimony had been strong, and tensions still ran high between the two villages. It boggled my mind that so soon after almost becoming extinct, the Deltans had managed to develop into some kind of cold war mentality. The real problem seemed to be that most of the residents of Caerleon were in the adolescent age range, and apparently felt a need to prove something.

The antagonism of the Caerleon Deltans concerned me enough, in fact, that I’d set up a surveillance system that would warn me if a significant number of them started a march on Camelot. I was probably just being paranoid, though. I hoped.





66. It’s Happening

Bill

January 2208

Epsilon Eridani

[Others convoy detected]

Not good. This was probably it. The Others would be heading for Gamma Pavonis to strip it down, leaving a dead planet and an empty system.

“Okay, Guppy. Details?”

[Convoy is twice the size of the GL 54 convoy. Projected destination is Delta Pavonis]

Delta Pavonis? That can’t be right. “Confirm that, please, Guppy.”

[Convoy trajectory is pointed directly at Delta Pavonis. Barring an unexpected course correction, certainty is 100%]

“Son of a bitch. The Pav.” I sent a quick email to Jacques in Delta Pavonis and Claude in Gamma Pavonis, explaining the situation. I followed up with messages to Oliver and Mario. Everyone else would get the announcement on the Current Events RSS feed.

Within seconds, several people popped into my VR.

“This is not according to plan,” Claude said.

Jacques shrugged. “I mentioned this possibility at a moot a while back. Delta is a richer target. A couple of extra years may be a small price to pay for double the payoff. And they know it, seeing the size of the convoy they’re sending.”

“Any chance that’s because of us?”

“Not a chance, Claude,” I said. “They don’t know we’re in that system in the first place. And anyway, it’s not like we’ve done more than buzz around them like a gnat. We are irrelevant.”

“And we will be assimilated.” Oliver gave us a lopsided grin. We all chuckled dutifully, at the attempt at levity more than anything.

“Getting down to business, how is our troop buildup?” I looked at each person in turn.

Jacques spoke first. “I’ve got twenty dreadnaughts, each of which has five fission bombs and the usual complement of busters for defense. I’ve been working on some fusion bombs, but haven’t gotten them far enough along. And now we’re out of time.”

Claude jumped in as soon as Jacques was done. “I’ve got fifteen dreadnaughts, but I’ve managed to make a total of six fusion bombs to replace some of the fission weapons.”

I looked at Oliver, who shrugged. “I’m building like crazy, old man, but I’m too far away to do any good. I’ll send out what I have, and maybe they’ll be useful for when the Others hit Gamma. Assuming they go there next.”

I looked around at everyone, then shook my head. “Another year or two, and we’d have had the cloaking cracked. I’m sure of it. As it is, do what you can. We’ll have a moot over the next couple of days, but other than moral support, you guys are on your own.”

* * *

The moot was held within a day. It was a somber affair. When I ascended the podium, all conversation ceased. No air horn, no boos. A sea of faces looked back at me, all wearing the same downcast expression.

“You all know the situation. Anyone have any ideas?”

“I don’t suppose your asteroid mover could move Pav…”

I looked at Thor. It probably hadn’t been a serious suggestion. “Sorry, buddy. In theory, the system can move anything, but right now I’d have trouble getting something the size of a planet to budge. Maybe someday…”

“If we don’t mind the inhabitants freezing to death about mid-way through the move.”

I nodded at Ben, one of the new batch of dreadnaughts. “True. The trip would still take a year or two subjective, and all that time spent without a sun. No bueno for sure. I think we’re stuck with the situation as it is. It’s going to come down to a toe-to-toe punch-up, and unfortunately before we’re ready. The only advantage we have is that we know it’s going to happen and they don’t.”

* * *

I looked over my reports. Claude had launched all of his new dreadnaughts to Delta Pavonis. With their better acceleration, they’d arrive before the Others, but only just barely. Any strategies would have to be worked out while they were in transit.

Between Claude’s group and Jacques’, we had thirty-five dreadnaughts. Jacques would probably get that total up to about sixty by the time Claude’s group arrived. It sounded like a lot until you looked at the size of the Others’ force. Twenty death asteroids, forty cargo vessels, and several hundred attendants. The attendants could be considered equivalent to busters. They were almost certainly AMI-controlled, and could be depended upon to ram an enemy if required. The cargo vessels would be difficult to destroy simply because of their size, but I didn’t expect a lot of offensive capability there.

The death asteroids would be the big unknown. We were pretty confident that we could withstand their death-rays, but we really didn’t know what other weaponry they might have in reserve. It was a safe bet that the Others had thought of the possibility of running into another species capable of fighting back.

I mentioned this to Garfield, and was surprised when he didn’t agree with me.

“I think we’ve visited pretty much every system that the Others have been to, Bill.” He waved a hand casually at the star map he’d popped up. “And they haven’t run into anything like that. So they’ve never had their butts kicked. Even when we’ve run up against them, the worst we’ve done is blow ourselves up. They’re arrogant. Borg-level arrogant and maybe even beyond. We’re not even assimilation targets to them, we’re just food.”

I thought about this. “So you think they may be overconfident.” I grinned. “Or maybe just appropriately confident.”

Garfield responded with a rueful chuckle. “Yeah, whatever. The point is, though, they may not have a plan B.”





67. Bad News

Howard

December 2210

HIP 14101

HIP 14101 was a bit of a bust. Nice sun, nice spectral lines, but nothing orbiting it worth talking about. A Jovian had managed to set up shop at the outer edge of the comfort zone, leaving no space for any terrestroid planets.

I was having a good time investigating it, though. According to WikiBob, no one had yet given a gas giant anything more than the standard cursory once-over. Okay, granted, they’re hard to colonize. But still.

Adapting the drones to operate inside the atmosphere of the Jovian was a constant headache—a game of Whack-a-Mole, as Original Bob would have said. I would get a little deeper in with each new prototype, but I was losing about one in three. But there was lots of metal in this system, and I had all the time in the world.

I was relaxing out on the patio when a ding indicated an incoming message. I popped it up and started to read.

It was another update from Dexter. More about the colonies, several new cities, population up over a million, space industries, yadda yadda.

Oh.

Stéphane was dying. Haliburton’s Encephalopathy had been identified within a decade of landing on Vulcan, and appeared to be one of the few diseases that found Terran life compatible. There was no treatment yet, and it was fatal within six months. I felt my stomach drop away. Stéphane had been my friend for a long time, and the thing with Bridget hadn’t changed that. Not really. But it reminded me that I called humans ephemerals for a reason.

I’d been lounging around in this system for too long. First, I wrote an email to Bridget and Stéphane, and asked when I could arrange a call.

Then, there would be other calls to make.

* * *

I pinged Bill, then popped in when I got an acknowledgement. Garfield was there as well, sitting and drinking a coffee. Diagrams and notes covered all the walls. Just your basic, normal, mad-scientist lab.

Both of them looked down in the dumps. All the Bobs were preparing for the Others’ arrival in Delta Pavonis. Bill and Garfield no doubt felt pressure to produce new weapons, but you could only do what you could do. Well, I sympathized, but I had immediate concerns.

“Hey, guys,” I said, motioning to the decorations. “What’s the project?”

“Couple of different ones,” Garfield answered. “But most of this wall is the Android Project. That’s what you called about, right?”

I nodded, and examined my shoes for a few moments before looking up. “How close are you guys to a more-or-less human-equivalent android? I’m going to have a funeral to attend soon.”

Bill and Garfield looked at each other, then back at me. “Pretty far along, actually. We’ve got a prototype. It looks like a mannequin, and you wouldn’t want to go dancing, but for walking around, I think it’s ready.”

“Could I make one in three months?”

Bill thought for a few moments. “Right now it’s all prototypes and one-offs, with manual assembly. We’d have to put together formal printer plans, but once we have those done, yes.”

I nodded. It would be in time. You never knew for sure with medical predictions, of course. But one could hope. “Send the plans to Dexter at Vulcan when they’re ready, okay?”

* * *

I’d received an email from Dexter that the android was ready. It was time to arrange a visit. I took a deep breath and placed a phone call.

After a few rings, Bridget answered the phone. “Howard?”

“Hi Bridge. How’s Stéphane doing?”

Bridget hesitated. She looked terrible. Stéphane’s illness was taking its toll on her as well. Her eyes were red, her hair was gray. Her skin was grey. I wanted to take her in my arms and make it all go away. And, I realized with a start, this was the first time that I had articulated my feelings about her so clearly.

“Stéphane won’t last much longer. Another couple of weeks is the most the doctors will commit to.”

“I’m so sorry, Bridget. How’s he taking it?”

“He’s mostly not lucid any more, Howard. We knew that was coming, and we’ve said our goodbyes.” She blinked back tears as she spoke. Brave words, but the pain behind them shone through.

I endured a momentary wave of grief as I realized I wouldn’t be able to say goodbye to my friend. I looked at Bridget without saying anything, and she nodded, understanding completely.

I tried to say the usual inane words of encouragement. I would have stayed on the line as long as she wanted. But she was tired, physically and emotionally, and she soon begged off.

I hung up the phone and put my face in my hands. It took several milliseconds to get myself under control, then I pinged Dexter.

“Hi Howard. Checking up on Manny?”

“Yep.” I looked around Dexter’s VR. It was a basic library sort of thing. I’d begun to notice less and less effort by the Bobs, especially the later generations, to put together an interesting VR. I made a mental note to discuss the shift in attitudes with Dexter if the opportunity ever came up.

He nodded and popped up a video and some report summaries. The video showed Manny the android in his support cradle. He looked complete. I leaned forward and looked closely at the summary windows.

“All tests completed successfully,” Dexter said. “I figured you’d want to do the first activation.”

“Thanks, Dex.”

Bill’s android project had been going on and off for sixty-five years now, and this was the latest version. Manny consisted of a carbon-fiber-matrix skeleton, designed and articulated to replicate the human version as closely as possible. Memory plastics that contracted when a voltage was applied stood in for muscles. The artificial musculature was laid down over the skeleton in the same layout as human musculature. The result was something that should be able to move, behave, and appear realistic. And neural feedback from the android would ensure a realistic experience for the operator.

Unfortunately, human-appearing skin and hair were low on the priority list. Right now, Manny did indeed resemble a mannequin more than anything else. No hair, pale plastic-texture skin, and gray, staring eyes. According to the specs, facial muscle control was still a little spotty. I had a quick glance at the Deficiencies List.

Well, Bill had said it was a prototype.





68. Recording

Jacques

September 2212

Delta Pavonis

Guppy popped into VR. [New memory core is online]

“Good. It was getting a little tight. Have the drones resume the full program.”

Guppy nodded and disappeared.

I had implemented a plan to record as much of the planet as I could before the Others got here. Not just Pav civilization, either. Plants, animals, scenery, geology, anything and everything I could think of. I built a standalone set of stasis chambers well in advance of the colony ships, and now I was slowly stocking it with genetic material from every species that I could get a needle into. A very informal and ad hoc genetic diversity vault, in essence. I had no overall organization, as I’d had no time to catalog and categorize the life on Delta Pavonis 4 into any kind of system. I was, in effect, stealing a strategy from Noah and treating everything as a “kind”. The recordings would help with identifying species and such later. If there was a later.

I was also recording Pav societies, cultures, and languages. Between all the spying and recording, my data storage requirements were massive. Guppy had just done the third upgrade since I’d started the project. I estimated there was at least one more upgrade coming.

I had played with the idea of contacting some Pav on the sly, perhaps to get a personal account of life. But Bill had convinced me that it would be cruel at best, and at worst, ghoulish.

Instead, I operated as a passive observer. Our technology was much better than the Victorian-era Pav sciences, but even so, things didn’t always go perfectly. There’d been a couple of sightings, and Pav society now had their own version of conspiracy theorists and flying-saucer nuts.

It made me wonder if the human equivalents had been based on some kind of reality. I tried to imagine some alien version of replicants hanging around Earth and kidnapping people. Mmm, nope. Especially with the anal probe thing. Just, no.

* * *

Since the plan involved kidnapping twenty thousand Pav, I wanted to have a pre-selected target group. Running around, grabbing people until I hit my quota, just didn’t strike me as efficient. I spent some time doing a census of small towns until I had found two that came in just under ten thousand souls each. I could, if necessary, top up the numbers from what appeared to be nearby military bases. The two towns, Mheijrkva and Aizzilkva, were like small-town USA—rural, residential, stable population, family-oriented.

I wanted to document and understand Pav society at the grass-roots level. On the other hand, I didn’t want to go down the road of Bob-1 and end up getting attached to individuals. I had a bad feeling, though, that we Bobs had a shared weakness of some kind—some need for attachment. It would require a delicate balancing act.

I picked a house at random in the town of Mheijrkva and set up surveillance. Gnat-sized roamers installed cameras and microphones in the house. I felt dirty, like some kind of voyeur, but reminded myself that I was preserving the record of a culture that would likely not exist in another decade.

* * *

The Los family group seemed fairly average, as Pav families went. Six adults, split evenly between the genders, plus nine children at various ages. The Pav didn’t have a large need for privacy, so bedroom organization was based mostly on available space. Furniture tended to move around on a daily basis, depending on mood.

Meals were held at specific times, simply because of the logistics of preparing food for that many people. But there was no organization that I could see. My best metaphor was a birthday party attended by two-year-olds—a total free-for-all.

The adults held an assortment of jobs. The Pav didn’t seem to care about stratification of social classes. The matriarch of the house, Da Hazjiar Los, was on Mheirkva’s town council. She seemed intelligent and, for a Pav, very level-headed. I made a point of tagging her for special handling, if and when.



I settled in for some long-term spying on people’s lives.





69. Wake

Howard

January 2211

Vulcan

Okay, here goes. This was the third time I’d said that, but I still hadn’t opened the cargo bay door. Stage fright, for sure.

Manny would never be mistaken for human. He was a giant step down from Mr. Data, in fact. But I had told Bridget I would be there, and I was going to keep my promise.

I took a deep breath—Manny performed the motion, not that he needed oxygen—and commanded the door to open. I stepped out and looked around.

I had landed the cargo drone in the parking lot of the funeral home. A small crowd of people was gathered in front of the building entrance, watching. I guess they’d been waiting for me. I activated magnification for a moment and recognized several people, including Butterworth.

I walked toward the group, concentrating on not falling flat on my face. I’d practiced beforehand, but this was my first physical public appearance in almost two hundred years. Nervous didn’t even begin to cover it.

Butterworth nodded to me. “Not bad, Howard. I’m sure you’ll continue to improve the product.”

I nodded back. There wasn’t enough facial control to smile, yet, and I didn’t trust my voice right at that moment.

We stepped into the building, where Bridget was waiting. She smiled, and my heart was almost wrenched out of my chest at the sadness there. She’d been with Stéphane for eighteen years. She stepped up to me and said, “Howard. I’m glad you came. Can I hug you?”

“Yes, of course. Manny has full sensory input. It’ll be my first real hug since I, uh…” Died. Wow. Almost a total foot-in-mouth moment. “…since I became a replicant.”

She wrapped her arms around me and hugged, and I could feel every bit of it, from her head against my cheek, to her breasts against my chest, to her arms around my back. The moment lasted an eternity, and a fraction of a second. Bridget stepped back and looked into my eyes, and I tried to re-engage my brain.

I finally managed, “It’s good to see you.” A small, panicked corner of my mind wondered if Manny had faithfully rendered my imitation of a fish trying to breathe. I hoped not.

I looked towards the coffin. “I guess replication wasn’t an option?”

“Catholic, remember?” Bridget gave me a wan smile. “I don’t think the Archbishop would approve.”

I wanted to ask if she would reconsider it for herself, but this wasn’t the time or place.

This was the memorial. The funeral mass had already been held, and I hadn’t actually forgotten that Stéphane was Catholic. I would have been a distraction, to put it mildly. Bridget had been careful with who she invited to this event, to prevent any kind of awkwardness with yours truly.

We stood around and talked, compared memories. I met Bridget’s children, Rosie, Lianne, and Howard, who answered to Howie. He would have just turned thirteen by the old Earth calendar, and seemed uncomfortable with his height, as if he’d just been through a growth spurt.

Howie bombarded me with questions, while the two girls stood behind him and looked on with wide eyes. Turned out Stéphane had told stories about me.

I told Howie a few stories about his father. As I did, memories of our early days on Vulcan flooded back. Stéphane had always accepted me as just a guy he talked to on the phone a lot. There’d never been any awkwardness, any reserve. It hit me that he was the best friend I’d had since well before I died. I scheduled a good cry for later, when I was alone.

Bridget came over to stand beside me, a plate of food in her hand. I looked down at it: the usual mix of hors d’oeuvres, meat slices, and crackers. Bridget saw my glance and asked, “Can you eat?”

“Not yet. Bill’s going to engineer Manny to be as human-like as possible, eventually. He’s been distracted with the Others thing, though. I’ll eat something in VR.”

Bridget looked at her children, at her plate, everywhere but at me. I knew the conversation we’d had before I left Vulcan was still hanging there, between us. I sighed, and experienced a moment of panic when I realized that the sigh was audible.

“We’ll talk some other time. You’re not leaving right after the memorial, are you?” Bridget had a small smile on her face.

“Uh, well, physically I’m about nineteen light-years away, Bridget. SCUT remote capability is making distance mostly irrelevant. Manny will go into storage when I’m done with him. So there’s no leaving as such. I’ll always be around, whether by phone or in person. So to speak.”

I looked around. The two girls had wandered off, but Howie was glued to our conversation.

* * *

“How’d it go?” Bill’s posture reminded me of Bridget, the day we introduced our product to Butterworth.

I guess I should have expected it. This was a potentially watershed moment for the Bobs. Real physical contact would change all of our interactions.

Bill and Garfield had both popped in as soon as I came back to VR. Dexter was there, as resident Bob. And Bob-1 had shown up as well. I gathered from conversation that he’d been harassing Bill for years about the androids.

“It worked,” I said. “It was a controlled environment, and everyone there was expecting me, of course. I don’t know about going out in public.”

“But it’s a start. And a successful one.” Bob was nodding his head repeatedly. I wondered for a second if his avatar had gotten stuck in a loop. But no, that was just excitement.

I accepted the inevitable, and settled into my chair for the debriefing.

“But how did it feel?” Bill fairly glared at me with the intensity of his question.

I had a momentary image of him reaching down my throat and ripping the answer out of me. I snickered, which got me a couple of concerned looks. “Uh, compared to VR?” I looked up for a moment, organizing my thoughts. “It’s an order of magnitude more real. I don’t know how much of that is psychological, just from knowing that it is real. But I think the VR only provides the sensations we’ve programmed it to provide, while Manny gives us everything, expected or not, relevant or not, and not under our control. Think of it as the difference between trying to tickle yourself versus being tickled by someone else. It’s an entirely different, far more intense experience.”

“Yeah,” Bill responded. “I tried to get some of that back with the baseball games, but I think it still falls short.”

“Don’t get me wrong, Bill. It’s not like I expect us to all fall over and go crackers. The VR saved Bob-1, and it’s saved all of us. We all agree on that.” I shrugged. “But it’s not the full-on experience. We’ve forgotten what that’s like. Today just reminded me.”

I looked at Bob, who had finally gotten the head-bobbing under control but was now bouncing on his toes. An arched eyebrow made him blush and stop the motion.

“I think the Android Project should be bumped up in priority,” Bob said.

Bill rolled his eyes. “There’s a surprise. You willing to help? You have the free time, right?”

Bob looked abashed, and Bill winced at the unintentional cheap shot. “Sorry, buddy. Didn’t mean that the way it came out.”

Bob shrugged. “I get it. And yeah, I do have a lot of free time these days. Maybe this will help.”

Bill popped up the project notes and schematics, probably rushing to change the subject. Garfield moved in, and the conversation went all technoid.

I sighed, stood and waved to everyone, then popped back to my VR. I had some thinking of my own to do.





70. Conversation

Howard

May 2211

HIP 14101

Bridget’s voice sounded tired. She was looking better, though, at least over the phone. Her color was coming back, she was starting to take care of herself again. I ached to say something, to take her hand, to—okay, I needed to cut off that train of thought. I silently chanted ephemeral a half-dozen times. It didn’t help.

“But it wouldn’t be me, would it, really?” Bridget’s image in the video window smiled.

Her sad smile was a pale ghost of the high-wattage grin that I remembered from better days. I swallowed and, after a false start or two, replied, “That’s a philosophical argument that I freely admit I’m not able to be objective about. I’m not Original Bob. I’m not even Bob-1 or Will or Charles. But I’m me, and I feel just as alive as Original Bob did.”

I stood up and began to pace around my apartment. The image that Bridget’s phone displayed to her would, of course, stay centered on me. “It would be you in very real ways, Bridget. I don’t know from souls, but in every other way, you would live on.”

“I mentioned the idea casually,” Bridget said after a moment of silence. “The girls looked horrified. Even Howie looked unsure. And you know he’s all about you and the other Bobs.”

I smiled in response. Bridget’s son was certainly my biggest fan.

I hesitated before continuing. “Look, Bridget, it’s not like any decision is irrevocable. Except the one that’s in force if and when. I checked with Benning. All you need to do is have her record a video call where you state your wishes. It counts as a codicil. You can record a new one any time.”

“I know, Howard. And for the moment, at least, I’ll have to pass.”

I sighed, defeated. “Okay, Bridget. But I’m still going to build the equipment. At least we don’t have to behead and freeze you nowadays—the stasis pods will do a much better job of preservation. And the scanners are pretty straightforward. Plus, it’s not necessarily just you. We could—” I stopped abruptly as a thought hit me. I queued it for consideration after the call.

Bridget looked at me with an arched eyebrow, but I didn’t explain, so she dropped it. “I hope you won’t be upset at me for this, Howard. I still want you to visit and all.”

“Of course not. It’s your decision, Bridget, and I’ll respect that. And yes, I’ll visit when I can.” I gave her an apologetic shrug. “Manny is getting a makeover right now. Bob-1 is insanely OCD when he’s motivated—no surprise to anyone—and he’s been improving the android tech at a furious pace.” I chuckled. “Bill admitted to me that he’s a bit embarrassed. He worked on the project for decades, and Bob’s leaving him in the dust in a timespan of months.”

“So Manny will be a little more human next time I see you?”

“Actually, Manny will look like Original Bob, from what I’m told. Believable hair and skin, and so forth. And he’ll be able to eat. Although he won’t—uh, never mind.” TMI. She really didn’t need to know the ultimate fate of the meal.

Bridget laughed. She knew exactly where my mind had gone. Just one of many things I loved about her.

“So we can finally have dinner together?”

I smiled and nodded. Finally, a real date.

* * *

“Butterworth?” Bill stared at me, eyebrows climbing his forehead.

“Well, granted, Riker will probably have a cow, which will be ironic. But Butterworth has got to be in his eighties now, if not more. The guy’s like an Egyptian mummy. He just gets drier and more leathery.”

“Maybe he’s a Pak Protector.” Bill grinned at me.

I rolled my eyes. Honestly, sometimes the early-generation Bobs were a bit weird. “Yeah, anyway, he’s military. Or ex-military, whatever. Maybe he can help with the war.”

“Interesting thought, Howard. I’m not against it, by any means. We should run it through a moot before bringing it up with Butterworth, though.”

I nodded, unfazed. Moots were held weekly, these days, because of the Others’ threat. I wouldn’t have to wait long.

* * *

I’d never seen Butterworth actually speechless before. I’d seen him trying not to explode, I’d seen him explode, I’d listened to him explode. This was new.

Butterworth stared into the video window, his jaw hanging slightly open. Finally, he found his voice. “You want to replicate me?”

“Well, eventually. Not like this week. The process can’t be done on a living person, not if you want to be left with a living person afterwards. But I’m building the equipment for—er, for any such circumstance, and it occurred to me that you would be valuable for the war effort.”

Butterworth looked down at his desk in silence. Then he looked up and smiled. “Sure, why not?”

Well, that was easy. “Um, okay. I’ll send you a file with some information. You’ll need to update your will.”

Butterworth nodded and ended the call.





71. Charlie

Bob

June 2213

Delta Eridani

Charlie hung in the rack, powered down and looking boneless. The Deltan android looked utterly convincing—I had put a lot of effort into getting the fur right, both in texture and layout. I didn’t want Charlie to come across like all the bad ape and werewolf costumes from twentieth century movies. This needed to be believable.

I realized that I was stalling. The android had been checked out every which way, and it was now time to put up or shut up.

Sighing, I ordered the cargo drone to open the hangar door, while I activated Charlie.



I turned my head and looked out the cargo bay doors. It took a moment for my eyes to adjust to the bright daylight outside. I undraped myself from the support rack and, staggering a little, walked to the doors. I stood for a moment, looking around at the forest. I’d seen all of this many times, of course, from the various drones, but there was something viscerally different this time. I was here in some undefinable way. It might be as simple as the feeling of the breeze lightly ruffling my fur, or the smell of the damp leaf layer that formed the floor of the forest. I spared a moment to grin with unconstrained joy, which the autonomic interface converted to a spread-eared, wide-eyed expression appropriate to a Deltan.

Stepping out onto the surface of Eden, I looked down at the ground, feeling the slightly slimy texture as the decaying leaf fragments squished between my clawed toes. Dappled sunlight flickered as the tree branches and leaves moved in the breeze. With an effort, I brought myself back on task. I triggered the heads-up display and pulled up a local map. The image hovering in my line of sight showed my location, and the location of Archimedes relative to me. I turned to line him up, and began to walk.

* * *

I spotted Archimedes through the underbrush, the observation drone hovering near his shoulder. He casually worked a small flint core as he waited. It appeared I was far more nervous about this meeting than he was. Or maybe that was his way of coping.

Well, whatever. Showtime. I walked towards him, and said his name as soon as I was within conversational distance. He looked up, and his eyes went wide. Springing to his feet, he squeaked, “Bawbe?”

I grinned at him as I approached. I opened my mouth to respond, but stopped in surprise when he jerked back and exclaimed, “Woof! Wow!”

“Problem?”

“Sorry, Bawbe. You smell. Kind of like the drones, especially when a new one is delivered. And also a bit like the ashes from a cold fire. You definitely won’t fool anyone.”

“Aw crap.” I rolled my eyes in frustration. “I didn’t think of that. Deltans depend much more on the sense of smell than humans do. Is it really bad?”

“Not as long as I’m upwind, no.” He grinned at me.

“Gotcha. Okay, I’ll go work on it. How about the rest? Does it look okay?”

Archimedes cocked his head one way, then the other. “You move in a sort of jerky way. Like a pup when he’s learning to walk, but maybe that’ll go away. What’s more weird is that your fur pattern is exactly the same on both sides of your body. No one is like that. It stands out.”

Of course. I’d made Charlie completely symmetrical. I would have to fix that. And the odor. I needed to smell like a Deltan, and more importantly like an individual. I took a deep lungful of Archimedes, cataloguing his odor and the lingering essence of what had to be Diana. It wasn’t insurmountable, thank the universe. Just chemistry.

“Got it. Okay, Archimedes. I’ll go away and fix this stuff. I can see you trying to stay upwind of me, even though you’re being polite about it.” I chuckled. “Having been downwind of a couple of people who needed showers, in a former life, I can relate.”

Archimedes looked slightly confused, but nodded. I waved goodbye and turned to walk back to the cargo drone.

* * *

Charlie the android, Take 2. I walked up to Archimedes and spread my arms, palms forward, in a Well? gesture.

He took a deep sniff, cocked his head, and nodded. “You’re walking better, as well. I guess that’s just practice, like with children. And your fur pattern is better. It’s very simple, but I know a few people like that. You’ll just be forgettable.” He grinned at me.

I laughed in response. “Well, that’s fine. The last thing I want is to attract attention. Now, will I be questioned if I enter Camelot?”

“No, I don’t think so.” Archimedes turned and gestured towards the village, and we began walking. I silently ordered the drone to return to standby.

“Camelot is so big, now,” he continued, “and Caerleon is growing as well. Even with the tension between us and them, a certain number of people still move back and forth. It’s not like there are rules about it.” He gave me a sideways glance and a knowing grin.

I pantomimed silent laughter at him.

Archimedes and I had talked about many things over the decades. I think he now understood that I wasn’t some kind of supernatural being, just someone with more knowledge than him. In a society where very little changed from generation to generation, it was easy to think of The Way Things Are as some kind of natural state. But Archimedes had seen enough new knowledge in his lifetime to understand that when you went from not knowing something to knowing something, it changed the way you lived.

With the loss of that awe had come a much deeper friendship, and a better understanding between us. Archimedes thought a lot of the things humans took for granted were hilarious. Like the idea of rules for everything. Deltans simply wouldn’t stand for such regimentation of their lives.

I found myself coming around to his point of view, more and more.

In short order we arrived at Camelot. With an effort of will, I suppressed the Monty Python skit from my mind.

As we walked across the land bridge, I looked ahead at the village proper. It was a sea of Deltans, in groups around the central fires, and smaller groups around individual fire-pits. I could see Archimedes’ point. No one would be able to keep track of this many people. Really, based on the old definition of a village where everyone knew everyone else, this could be thought of as an unhealthy development. Caerleon wasn’t much better. I wondered if the Deltans had a higher tolerance for crowding, or if they had developed a reluctance to split off villages because of the gorilloid and hippogriff threats. I resolved to bring it up with Archimedes when time permitted.

We moved toward Archimedes’ hexghi. There I saw Diana, Buster, Belinda, and a couple of generations of children around the fire. Buster’s siblings had long since moved on to their own firepits, but Buster had stayed close with his father. I was glad of that.

So, Diana. I was unreasonably nervous. Really, how could she associate me with The Bawbe? I appeared to be some random Deltan. Just the same, I couldn’t shake it.

We sat down at the fire, and Archimedes introduced me to the adults using a common Deltan name, which I instructed the translation routine to render as Robert. I performed the proper ear-waggle greeting to each. Diana didn’t even twitch, and I relaxed.

I noted that Diana was looking old and frail. It confirmed my feeling that Archimedes was aging more slowly than average. Probably the same gene responsible for his increased intelligence was affecting his lifespan. I felt a moment of relief that she might be gone soon, then a spike of shame at the thought. I might not like her, but she was Archimedes’ life mate, and he was my friend.

The kids—I realized with a shock that these were Buster’s grandchildren—had started a game of tag while the adults talked, and one of them barreled into me. There was a moment of tense silence, then I laughed and poked the child with a finger. The tension dissolved and Diana passed around some jerky.

Just family.





72. Battle

Bill

February 2217

Delta Pavonis

All warfare is based on deception.

-- Sun Tzu, Art of War



The defensive crews were less than a week away from Delta Pavonis, and their tau was now down to the point where it was worthwhile having a conversation. Rather than asking them to jack up to our time rate, we would be slowing down to theirs. Because of the numbers, I was hosting the meeting in the moot VR.

“First and most significant,” I said, “is that we’ve cracked the cloaking tech. It took a lot longer than I expected, so Jacques has only been able to retrofit about half of his nukes. There’s no time for you to do anything, so all the non-stealthed hardware—including Bobs—is going to be considered decoys.”

I looked around the room at a sea of somber faces. We’d all gone into this with the attitude that it was probably a suicide mission. With remote backups, suicide missions weren’t as final as they used to be, but still… the person restored from a backup was not the person who created the backup. It was some comfort to know that your memories would go on, but it didn’t feel that it would be personal in some way.

I glanced at the status window that I had put up. It showed the Others’ armada only two days farther out. We had very little time to deploy a defense.

“How are we doing this, then?” asked Andrew, one of the squad leaders.

I nodded to him, acknowledging the question. “I’ve discussed strategy with Butterworth. Unfortunately, most space battle strategy is theoretical, since there’s only been one space war. But I discussed options extensively with him, and the colonel did have some suggestions about deployment. He can’t be personally involved, of course, since he operates on biological time. For what it’s worth, I’ll be acting as his proxy.”

There were silent nods around the circle. I added arrows and icons to the status window. “Your group is coming in from this side, and Jacques’ group will be coming in from here and here. We’ll hit in three waves, staggered so we’re not taking each other out. Hopefully the Others can’t redeploy defenses quickly enough and will have to split their assets into three groups instead.” The animation in the window played out a visual of my description.

“While the Others are fending us off, the stealth bombs will come straight in. We hope that they will be able to get in close and do some significant damage.”

I sat back, chin in hand, and studied the graphic. There was no subtlety at all. On the other hand, it was nice and simple, with few unknowns.

* * *

The first attack group was five minutes out when the Others registered their presence. The group’s trajectory brought them in at thirty degrees off of their approach line. I could see in the SUDDAR window that the Others were deploying drones to act as a first wave of defenders. There wasn’t enough detail at that distance to be able to tell, but we assumed they were rotating the death asteroids to target us as well.

There was very little conversation as we approached. Each Bob presumably took the time to make peace with his own thoughts. Or update his backup. Either or.

At about three minutes distance, there was a whoop from one of the dreadnaughts. “Just took a hit from a death ray,” he announced. “I got sparks, but no significant damage.”

I smiled but didn’t comment. At this distance, even a version-3 Heaven vessel would have survived. We had to assume they were either massively overconfident, or that had been just a probe of some kind. At least one death asteroid was now discharged. It was unlikely it would be able to recharge in time to participate further in this battle.

At one minute, I activated the general channel. “Time to rock, boys. Deploy all busters and nukes. Let’s light up the sky!”

The Bobs did as ordered. Seventy-five ships became almost four hundred signatures. Now the Others would have to react. Death zaps would simply not be an option for taking us down.

And sure enough, SUDDAR indicated a massive rearrangement of vessels. We had a couple hundred drones to deal with. Statistically, we should be able to get through the defenders with about half of our units, but that wouldn’t be enough to take the Others’ main vessels down. I was sure the Others must be smiling—or whatever they did—with glee at our pathetic showing.

And finally, contact. Andrew’s group was the first to pass through the Others’ armada. At the speeds they were travelling, there was no chance of any actual visual contact. Star Wars notwithstanding, ships didn’t buzz around each other like World War II fighter planes. Everything happened in microseconds, and showed up only in status windows.

Results from the first pass showed we’d lost about half of our busters and bombs, and eight dreadnaughts, but we’d taken out about twice as many of them. That was pretty good, and should wipe the smile-equivalents off of the Others’ face-equivalents.

Apparently the Others agreed, because half of the death asteroids released zaps at our armada.

“Report,” I ordered on the general channel.

Responses came back. No further Bob casualties, although a couple of the dreadnaughts were doing emergency repairs. They must have been caught square in the middle of a beam.

However, the bombs and busters weren’t particularly shielded, and any unit caught anywhere in one of the death-rays was dead. We had made a decision, based on this likelihood, to equip these units with regular radio comms only. No advanced SUDDAR, no SCUT, and no chance of giving anything away to the enemy.

The second wave came in right away, not giving the Others time to regroup. They approached from thirty degrees off the Others’ flight line as well, coming in from a vector at 120 degrees of rotation. I watched in the status window transmitted by the group leader.

The second wave passed through the Others’ armada as quickly as we had, but with much less organized resistance from the Others. We were able to put several nukes into a couple of big cargo carriers, and even into one of the death asteroids. The nuke must have hit a charged accumulator of some kind, because the pyrotechnics were truly epic—far more than could be accounted for by a low-yield fission bomb. Twin jets of white-hot plasma, glowing right into the x-ray band, shot out of the vessel in opposite directions. The surface of the death asteroid peeled back, then it completely disintegrated, spewing pieces in all directions. Cheers went up from all the video windows.

The Others responded with a volley of something—possibly drones, possibly missiles—aimed at the receding attack group. The bogeys displayed truly incredible acceleration, in the hundreds of G’s. It took only moments for us to find out what they were.

Fusion bombs.

The second battle group had been clustered together—no reason to scatter, as far as they knew. Now they were melted slag. We’d lost twenty-five dreadnaughts and a couple hundred drones. Bobs looked at each other, stunned.

But our third battle group was coming in, and we had no time to mourn. I sent a quick IM to the group leader, instructing them to scatter at the end of their pass.

The Others started moving their defenses to the point a further 120 degrees around, where they expected us to come in, given a symmetrical series of assaults.

Exactly what Butterworth had suggested they’d do.

Our third group came in only ten degrees off the first group’s path, 130 degrees away from where the defenses were forming, completely blindsiding them. The dreadnaughts and drones tore through the defenders like tissue paper. Lobbed fission weapons took out two cargo vessels and another death asteroid.

As the battle group exited the theater on the far side, they scattered. The Others launched another volley of fusion drones in pursuit. The Bobs had a massive head start, but the pursuers had that ridiculous level of acceleration. It was a footrace we couldn’t win.

Everyone was intent on the developing drama, which left the door open for Butterworth’s next suggestion. A trio of lonely nukes, on ballistic trajectories, with virtually no emissions, now sailed in from the vector from which the Others had been expecting the third attack. Three flashes, and two more cargo vessels were drifting, offline.

I imagine, somewhere in one of the death asteroids, some Others general was screaming invective at his subordinates while veins pulsed on his neck and forehead. Or some equivalent. In any case, the Others apparently decided to finally take us seriously. A massive series of SUDDAR pings emanated from their fleet, swamping our receivers. The transmission power was truly incredible, and my jaw dropped at the readings. I looked at one of the other Bobs. The sheer power behind that broadcast said, better than anything else they’d done, that we were gnats.

And more to the point, it lit up every vessel and drone in the immediate area. Whether it would reveal our last surprise or not, well, we’d know in a few moments.

It did.

The Others launched a dozen fusion drones straight forward along their flight line, where several cloaked fusion bombs were approaching. This would have been our coup de grâce. Instead, it would be little more than a parting shot.

I instructed the incoming nukes to begin evasive maneuvers. The Others might not be able to maintain a continuous bead on the cloaked units.

The Others’ fusion drones deployed into a defensive grid, and detonated simultaneously.

“Not bad…” Charlie said. “They estimated that pretty well.”

I checked status. “They took out two of ours. The last one still looks operational. I don’t think they have time to do anything about it. It’s also interesting that they haven’t broadcast another ping like the last one…”

“Like the gamma-ray blasts, it probably requires a recharge.”

I nodded distractedly while I guided the last cloaked fusion weapon. Right into one of the death asteroids. It detonated perfectly. When the flash cleared, there was nothing left but scattered debris.



We were done. We’d used up everything we had. Our battle groups, what was left, were heading away from the Others’ fleet at far too high a velocity to be able to turn around in any reasonable interval. By the time we could get back in the game, the Others would be at the Pav home planet.

Eight death asteroids and eleven cargo carriers were still under power. If they decided to continue on and rebuild in the system, there would be nothing we could do. We held our breath, as the seconds ticked by.

No change.

I sat, stunned, as the Others continued on towards Delta Pavonis, and the Pavs.

We’d failed.

[Incoming message. In Mandarin]

I was almost doubled over with nausea, but it was logical to find out what they had to say. “Put it on, Guppy.”

You have proven to be more than food. You are pests. We will harvest this system, despite your pathetic attempts at defense. Then we will harvest your Sol and Epsilon Eridani systems. And your species will end its existence in our larders.

Fuck.

I tried to open a chat with Jacques, but got nothing. I pinged Andrew instead.

“Hey Andrew. Any idea where Jacques is?”

“Hey, Bill. Sorry, Jacques was killed during his group’s attack. We have a differential up to the last few minutes, so we’ll be restoring him as soon as we have a new vessel.”

“Crap.” I rubbed my forehead. We had some spare matrices, but it could still be days before we were able to get that done.

Andrew interrupted my train of thought. “Did he ever follow through on that plan to kidnap some Pav?”

“Yeah. Kind of a worst-case response. I’ve triggered implementation already. We’ll get twenty thousand Pav off-planet before the Others get there. We’re not going to be gentle about it, though. We can’t afford to have a discussion and ask for volunteers.”

The Pav were now an endangered species. I just hoped that Jacques had taken plant and animal specimens and such.





73. Collection

Phineas

February 2217

Delta Pavonis

I closed the connection with Bill, and turned to Ferb. The defense of Delta Pavonis had failed, and we now had to compound the karmic deficit by ripping up to twenty thousand people from their homes by force.

Jacques had put a lot of thought into the problem, and Ferb and I had expanded on the plan once we’d come online. It wasn’t going to be pretty. But there simply wasn’t time for explanation and debate. It should have helped that the people we were going to snatch would otherwise die. It didn’t.

Jacques had selected two towns of the right size, in different parts of the target country, to maximize genetic diversity while still retaining community. We carried specialist drones in our holds, ready to do the deed.

I hovered over my town, Mheijr, in the dead of night. If this was Earth, it would be about 3 a.m. A dog barked—well, the local equivalent of a dog did the equivalent of barking—but otherwise, there was no movement. Without an electrical grid, most places still went totally dark once everyone went to bed.

I sent out the first wave of drones. These were equipped with canisters of a heavy, odorless gas that we’d developed. It would render the victims unconscious for up to four hours. By then, hopefully, we’d have them all in stasis.

The drones performed their task, then headed back to the cargo hold, and the second wave of drones exited to collect bodies. Each drone could hold two adult Pav. It would take about fifty trips per drone to collect the full ten thousand people.

I hoped that we would come up under ten thousand in total rather than have to leave people behind. I dreaded what anyone would have to go through, waking up to find that almost everyone in their town had disappeared. It would be devastating, even without the inevitable suspicion that would fall on them.

The operation completed flawlessly.

Some comments over the SCUT from Ferb indicated that his end wasn’t going quite so swimmingly. I smiled, thinking of the ribbing I’d give him. Then I lost the smile when I realized neither of us would be in the mood.

I’d emptied the town, with a count of 9,273. I checked with Ferb, to see what his head count would be like. His town was coming in under as well, so I implemented one of our contingency plans. There were a number of bases within a few hundred miles that housed either standing armies or perhaps some version of peacekeeping forces. I raided three of them, and brought my total up to within a hundred of my maximum capacity. Some military personnel would be worth having.

The gas we had used would biodegrade within hours. By the time investigators were brought in, there wouldn’t even be an odor. Assuming they had time to do that before the Others got here.

I pinged Ferb. “Ready to go?”

He didn’t answer for a few milliseconds. I was just opening my mouth to repeat the question when he responded.

“Yeah, looks like it. Woo hoo…”

I nodded to myself. Yeah, woo hoo, indeed.





74. Observing the Process

Bill

May 2217

Delta Pavonis

The Others ignored us.

I wasn’t sure if they knew we had nothing left, or if they were simply not interested unless we attacked again. But either way, they didn’t chase us out of the system or attempt to sweep it for drones.

We had a dozen or so stealth drones still in service, so we deployed them to record the harvesting process. This would be the hardest thing I’d ever done, but we needed as much information as possible.

The Others took a week to set up around Delta Pavonis 4. Then the death asteroids started a series of sweeps that eventually covered the entire planet. We couldn’t get close enough for a visual, but we knew what was happening. Up to a billion sentient beings were being slaughtered, to serve as food and to clear the way for efficient mining operations.

Over the next several weeks the Others deployed massive printer operations. It was too early to tell for sure, but it looked like at least some of them would be building new cargo vessels.

I closed the windows and instructed Guppy to let me know if anything needed my attention. I pinged Jacques, and received an invitation to visit.

Jacques had had ten years to prepare for the arrival of the Others, and he’d planned accordingly. He had built two colony ships adapted for Pav passengers. They now contained twenty thousand Pav in stasis. We could keep them in that state for as long as necessary. Eventually, the Others would leave. We would attempt to restart the ecology, then we’d decant the Pav. I didn’t look forward to that conversation.

Jacques had also built several spare matrices and housed them in the colony ships, ready for any casualties of the attack. He probably hadn’t counted on being one of those. Now he was a passenger, with no ship of his own.

Still, with the state of our VR tech and SCUT communications, it wasn’t a huge disability. More of an inconvenience.

I popped in. “Hi Jacques. How’s the life of a passenger?”

He shrugged. “Meh. I’m more of an administrator right now. Trying to clean up and organize the surviving Bobs and equipment, and do inventory. Nothing unaccounted for, so we don’t have to worry about the Others getting SCUT or something similar.”

I waved that away. “I already checked up on that. I’m more worried about the Pav. Should we consider moving them to another system?”

“I know what you mean, Bill. Here, they’ll be going back to a dead planet. Psychologically, that’s going to be devastating. I’ve got enough seed stock and such to rebuild a basic ecology, but ninety percent of the planetary diversity is gone for good.”

“So, why not another system? Besides the psychological issues, by the time the Others are done with it, there’ll be no metal left.”

“Erm, the Others aren’t that thorough. They take like 95% of it, but they don’t scrabble for every last gram. Still, it will be a problem if the Pav want to rebuild an industrial society. Could we bring in resources from out-system?”

I sighed and shook my head. “Theoretically, sure. But then we’ve got another race depending on us. Another client race. Do you really want to become an overlord?”

“Crap.” Jacques sat back and rubbed his forehead. “Whatever happened to heading off into the cosmos and exploring? I distinctly remember that was the plan when Bob-1 was heading for Epsilon Eridani in the first place.”

“I know. No one to answer to, no responsibility except to ourself. Maybe we’ll get back to that eventually. Right now, though, we’ve got all these problems, and we can’t just walk away.”

“Yeah, yeah.” Jacques gave me a wry look, with one eyebrow raised. “Still, Pacino just keeps looking smarter and smarter.”

“Mm. Look, all this is on the agenda for the next moot. It’s not going to be a fun meeting.”

* * *

It was not a fun meeting.

We had just witnessed the death of somewhere between half a billion and a billion people. We Bobs are generally upbeat and optimistic, but this had really kicked the stuffing out of us.

“I keep telling myself that this isn’t the first species that they’ve wiped out,” Howard said, to the room in general. “But it doesn’t help.”

“This is the first one that we’ve witnessed,” Tony responded. “It’s just more real, somehow.”

There were nods, followed by a long silence.

From the back, a voice muttered, “They need to be exterminated.”

The crowd muttered agreement. I looked in the general direction of the voice. “That’s a significant decision. Nevertheless, I’m not inclined to argue. Let’s wait a couple of days to let our emotions die down, then take a vote.”

“Leaving outstanding,” Thor said, “the small detail of exactly how we’re going to do that.”

This comment produced another long silence. No one was really in the mood for deep thought. We’d save this subject for another day.

* * *

I orbited over Ragnarök, watching listlessly through my forward camera as the planet turned beneath me. After the moot, I’d had some idea of working on my current android, but I couldn’t even get up the energy to do that. Funny, since Bob-1 had woken up in New Handeltown all those years ago, we’d always seemed to be on top of things. Yeah, there were dangers, there were scary times. I remembered being unsure of whether I’d come out alive in the encounter with Medeiros. And I also remembered being almost unsurprised when he went down.

This was the first time that we had completely, unutterably failed at something. This was a total rout. There was no way to wring a moral victory out of it. And worse, I didn’t see any way to turn it around.

I watched Bullseye slide across my view as I passed that section of the planet. The crater was now a freshwater sea, with a central island. Okay, that was kind of a failure, too.

The Others had brushed us aside like fleas. They’d stated their intention to hit Earth, and if we tried to stop that, they’d probably just brush us aside again. There was no way that Will was going to be able to get everyone off Earth before the Others arrived. Not even a significant fraction.

We might, if we threw everything into it, be able to get a couple million out of the way. But no more. And that would only delay the inevitable. The Others were coming, and coming to all the possible homes of humanity. We were an endangered species, as long as they continued to exist.

Garfield popped in, and we exchanged a few words. He wasn’t in any better mood. There would be no cheering up happening here today, not by anyone. He sat and watched the video window with me.

The time passed, almost unfelt. Eventually, Bullseye came around and slid across my view again, mocking me with this visible reminder of my fallibility. Nothing like a couple hundred thousand tons of ice to make a dent in a planet.

Nothing like a couple hundred thousand tons… I sat up, abruptly, frowning. Garfield glanced sideways at my unexpected movement. Maybe we’d been looking at this all wrong.





75. Reunion

Howard

January 2216

HIP 14101

Wow, and I thought the stage-fright was bad last time. I’d been staring at the inside of the cargo door for what felt like forever. By this time, Bridget would have given up and gone to bed.

I checked the time. Three seconds elapsed. Oh, for—

With a feeling akin to resignation, I ordered the door to open, and walked out of the cargo bay.

Bridget stood on her porch, waiting. She gave me a smile and a small, aborted wave as I turned in her direction. I walked toward the patio, cataloguing all the sensations I was receiving from Manny—the cool evening breeze, the slight unevenness of the front walkway, the brush of my clothing as I moved. And the disappearance of every inch of distance as I approached her. Like falling down a gravity well.

Finally, after a million years or so, I walked up the two wooden steps, stopped in front of her, and held out my hands. She took them and said, “You’re looking good, Howard.”

I smiled—I’d checked in the mirror a few dozen times, and the smile looked normal—and replied, “It’s nice to see you again.” Bridget would be 57 by now, physically. She’d stopped dyeing her hair and was showing her natural gray. She had crow’s feet around her eyes, and an incipient double-chin.

I quite literally couldn’t have cared less.





76. Funeral

Bob

November 2220

Delta Eridani

I stood to one side as Archimedes hugged with Buster and his siblings, Rosa and Pete. Diana had died overnight. Peacefully, thank the Universe. Deltans didn’t cry as such, but their equivalent was just as heart-wrenching.

Diana was laid carefully into the grave, then Archimedes and his children each placed one white flower in her arms. As they stepped out of the way, the long line-up of descendants filed past and added more flowers.

Diana and Archimedes had done quite well with spreading their genes. When the line-up was finished, thirty-one flowers formed a large bouquet in her embrace. The family filled in the grave, then placed several large stone slabs over it to protect it from scavengers.

When it was done, everyone but Archimedes stepped back. He slowly sank to his knees, leaned forward, and hugged himself. Uttering a low keening, Archimedes rocked slowly back and forth.



I popped into VR, shaking and taking deep breaths. Charlie would be fine for a few moments on autonomous control, and I was very close to losing it. I rubbed my eyes savagely, muttered a few curses, then popped back into Charlie.



The crowd was slowly dispersing, leaving Archimedes and his children to their mourning. I took the opportunity to look Archimedes over. I had only an estimate of his age from when I first showed up, of course, but I put him at about seventy, which put him slightly older than Moses when he passed away. And Moses had been considered ancient.

All of which meant that I would probably be attending another funeral soon. I vowed it would be my last.





77. Completion

Bill

April 2221

Delta Pavonis

It took a little over four years for the Others to strip Delta Pavonis.

It was an impressive speed, until you realized that exponential behavior was involved. They brought a huge complement of autofactories, which they used to produce equipment, which mined resources for the production of more equipment. At some point, they stopped building equipment and started loading the cargo vessels. Finally, they harvested most of the equipment they’d built. The fleet that left the system consisted of only cargo vessels and death asteroids.

Once they were gone, we moved in to examine the damage. The asteroid belt and any small moons in the system had been stripped, of course. What really hurt was the state of Delta Pavonis 4.

The Others hadn’t been concerned with ecological damage, obviously. They’d left the planet a dirty ball of mud. All the green had long since faded to a dull brown. The blue of the oceans was replaced by a mottled grey, and the ice caps had either melted or been coated with dust and soot.

Every major city had been demolished. The lack of corpses was, in a way, a blessing. But it left a ghostly, empty tableau that would have been completely appropriate to any of a hundred post-apocalyptic movies.

I took it as long as I could, then I turned off the video feeds, put my face in my hands, and wept.

* * *

Jacques agreed that rehabilitation of DP-4 would take a long time, but he quite correctly pointed out that flying the Pavs to another system far enough away from the Others to be safe would possibly take just as long. We had a reasonable candidate—a wandering Bob had found a suitable colonization target at HIP 84051. At more than 40 light years from Sol, it didn’t even rate a name. Just a minor designation in the constellation Ara.

I popped over to visit Will. “Hey guy. How are you holding up?”

Riker still wore a haunted look. Homer’s suicide had affected him more than anyone would have thought possible. With the perfect memory that being a replicant brought with it, things didn’t fade with time. The vengeance that he had extracted had helped some, but there would always be a hole in the Bobiverse.

He gave me a small smile. “Holding steady, Bill. You here about HIP 84051-2?”

At my nod, he continued, “It was on the discussion agenda, and when I brought up the circumstances, the UN voted to make it available to the Pav refugees. Honestly, I think it’s a little too far from Sol to be really attractive, anyway.”

I sat down and materialized a coffee, and took a moment to look around. Will had long since given up the Star Trek motif, and he was going by his first name—um, I guess Number One’s first name, anyway—most of the time, now. That was the name that our relatives knew him by, anyway.

The VR resembled a housing unit on Vulcan, although I recognized some décor and paraphernalia from Original Bob’s apartment. I smiled to see the Limited Edition Spock plaque, signed by Leonard Nimoy, hanging on the wall.

“Life just keeps getting more complicated, doesn’t it?” I raised the coffee in salute.

“Suppose so.” Will stretched, then materialized a coffee of his own. “I’m beginning to think Bob-1 has the right idea. He’s been talking about going out again, once Archimedes is gone. Just point the ship and accelerate for a while.”

I sighed and nodded. We were, what, eight to ten generations deep in Bobs, now? Bob-1 had achieved a kind of legendary status. He rarely showed up at moots any more, and when he did, it was like a Shatner sighting. I felt a deep sympathy for him. He was the first of us to get emotionally involved with ephemerals, and until Jacques and the Pavs, his had had the worst outcome.

“I understand you’re going to wake some Pav and put the question to them,” Will said.

“Mm, yeah. Jacques has an unreasonable attachment to the idea of recolonizing DP-4, in my opinion. But he’s rational enough to see it.”

Will returned one of his rare full-on smiles. “Well, Bob, right?”

We laughed together, and I continued, “So we’ll give them the choice—attempt to recolonize DP-4, or head for a new world with an already-established ecosystem. And a compatible one, as seems to be the norm.” I chuckled. “I sure wish I could go back and talk to Dr. Carlisle. I bet he’d be tickled that his theories have been so emphatically vindicated.”

Will nodded but didn’t comment. I sat back, and we sipped our coffees in silence, simply enjoying the company and the momentary pause in existence.

* * *

The Pav huddled in a corner, whimpering. I’d expected a certain level of fear, but the Pav’s reaction bordered on xenophobia.

But I doubted the, uh, recruitment had involved a lot of discussion and consent. Kidnapping was a pretty accurate description. The specimen in front of us was probably still traumatized.

At that moment, the door to the chamber opened and three more Pav staggered in. They were still suffering from post-stasis confusion, but they reacted in instinctive Pav pack fashion, by huddling in a pile with our first candidate. The presence of company seemed to calm her significantly.

Over the next few hours, we brought in several more Pav, until we had eight of them in the room. The number was arbitrary, but Jacques’ investigation of the species had indicated a general maximum of eight adults to a family group. We hoped that it was a significant number for them.

When they appeared outwardly calm and had started to compare notes with each other, I decided it was time for official first contact.

“Hello.”

All eight Pav went into alert posture. The resemblance to meerkats was even more pronounced than usual, and in better circumstances I would have chuckled at the tableau.

“Who are you? Where are we?”

This was not going to be easy. “My name is Bill. I’m part of BobNet.” The translation routine rendered proper names phonetically, but the sounds wouldn’t mean anything to them. “Who we are is a very long story. Where you are and why, is a shorter and very unpleasant story.”

I described the Others to them, and explained their habit of raiding systems and killing off planets. A monitor on one wall displayed images of Others, the aftermath of Zeta Tucanae, and finally the destruction of Delta Pavonis 4.

As the images of dead cities, oceans and forests flashed on the screen, the Pav began to keen. Sitting through that was one of the hardest things I’d ever done, but I had a moral obligation to stick with it.

It took a few hours, but we finally got through the whole story. The group seemed perplexed.

“You want us to decide? To return to Aszjan or settle a different world?”

“That is correct.”

The Pac huddled and argued in low voices for several minutes.

Hazjiar, who seemed to have taken on the role of spokesperson, said, “Why?”

“Because we don’t know you well enough to know what would work best for you.”

“Why not?”

“Because we haven’t been studying you for long enough.”

“Why not?”

Oh, holy… “That’s not important. We will make the decision if you don’t want to, but we wanted to give you the option first.”

“And there are twenty thousand of us? Why not more?”

“That’s how many will fit into the two ships that we were able to build.”

“Why?”

What’re you, a four-year-old? I would have to nip this in the bud, before I blew a transistor or something. “Again, not important now. Are you willing and able to make that decision? If not, let us know and we’ll take care of it.”

“We will discuss this. Is there food?”

“You mean at the new planet? Oh, you mean now. Sorry. I’ll get some.”

Fortunately, Jacques had thought of stocking up on standard Pav food and drink. I decanted a small supply and delivered it. The Pav laid in as if they hadn’t eaten in a week.

I stared in shock at the free-for-all. So far no one seemed to have lost a limb, but that could just be luck.

Jacques chuckled at the expression on my face. “No, that’s pretty much normal feeding behavior. Miss Manners would never catch on with these people.”

I shook my head. “Count them after they’re done, okay? Make sure there are still eight.”

* * *

At Hazjiar’s request, we provided images of the proposed colony planet. It possessed a marginally heavier gravity, with correspondingly thicker atmosphere, but was similar enough to Aszjan that adaptation wouldn’t be an issue. The flora and fauna would be completely unfamiliar to them, of course, but it didn’t include anything too large to deal with.

We promised the Pav any help they needed, regardless of their decision. They seemed heartened by that, and I privately sighed in exasperation. Again, we were going to be responsible for another client race. If Jacques wanted to be involved, fine, but I resolved to keep my distance.

* * *

“We will choose the new world.” Hazjiar stood tall and spoke with confidence. I knew that the decision hadn’t been easy, or unanimous, but I was impressed at their willingness to even make a decision.

She looked down, then continued in a softer voice. “We do not like the idea of all resources being supplied by you. No offence, but we do not know you.”



I grinned at Jacques, who smiled back and shrugged.



“That’s fine, Hazjiar. We’ll get started right away. It will be necessary to put you back to sleep. But we’ll be gentler, this time.”

Hazjiar nodded. By coincidence, a nod meant the same thing to the Pav as it did to us. “When we awake, we will be there?”

“That’s correct. And we will have set up an encampment for you to live in until you can build something for yourselves.”

Hazjiar cocked her head slightly. “I am curious. Why do you do this? Who is paying you? Or do you expect us to pay you?”

I chuckled, which the translation routine converted to the Pav expression of humor. And a good thing—who knew how a human chuckle would come across.

“We don’t use money, Hazjiar. We have no need for it.”

This statement produced a look of shock. Apparently capitalism was alive and well in Pav culture. After staring at the monitor for a few more seconds, Hazjiar turned away, while muttering something that sounded like “Dozhagriyl.” The routine translated it as “critters with broken brains.”

The Pav seemed reluctant to return to the stasis chambers, and generally acted like a bunch of kids trying to delay bedtime. Eventually, though, we managed to cajole them all through the door and into the prep room. Within an hour, they were all squared away.

“Well, Bill, I guess this is it.”

“Not quite yet, Jacques. A couple of the guys did some scavenging. We’ve managed to retrieve enough resources to put together a couple of version-3’s for you and the other Bobs who are bodiless right now. It’ll take few months, but at least then you’ll be able to ride escort instead of supercargo.”

Jacques nodded. “Thanks, Bill. Let’s do that.”

* * *

Finally, departure day. The two refugee ships, officially named REFUGE-1 and -2, brought their SURGE drives up to full power and turned their bows to aim for HIP 84051. I watched their departure from the forward camera of one of the Bobs that was still in-system.

With the departure of the refugee ships, there was no longer any reason to maintain a presence in this system. It represented our greatest failure, and several Bobs had complained that it felt as though it was full of ghosts. Everyone who didn’t have a reason to stay had long since left, and now most of the rest of us would be departing. A couple of eighth-generation Bobs had volunteered to stay behind and do a post-invasion survey.

I looked at Andrew across the table, waiting for him to speak. Finally, he took a deep breath and leaned forward to put his elbows on the table. “Everyone is gathering at Gamma Pavonis. Threats or no, the Others still have a Dyson Sphere to build. They won’t halt everything while they march off to Sol. We want to be ready next time.”

I stared into space, nodding. “Meanwhile, Riker has started building dreadnaughts at Sol, and I’m building a fleet in Epsilon Eridani. Ditto Oliver in Alpha Centauri. We have the cloaking nailed now, so we’ll be able to give them a harder time of it. The root problem, though, is still to produce enough ordnance to make a dent in the Others’ armada. The size problem is still overwhelming.”

“This is all just a delaying action.” Andrew shook his head morosely. “As long as the Others are always making the first move, we can never defeat them. All they have to do is huddle for a decade or two, rebuild, and we’re back to square one. We have to take the fight to them.”

“This is true, and you know damned well it’s been the subject of many a moot.” I glared at Andrew. “I have an idea that I’m working on that might form a final solution, but I’m not sure yet if it’s even feasible. And even if it turns out to be workable, it’s a long game. Meanwhile, we’re also trying to gear up to an invasion fleet. Maybe we can drop in on the Others and pay our respects.”

Andrew’s only answer was a predatory smile.


1. Face-Off



Bob

March 2224

Delta Eridani

The pigoid erupted from its lair with an angry squeal. It displayed startling speed for something with such short legs. The two rock throwers sprinted to the side, fur erect along their spines and ears sticking straight out in excitement. The rest of us set the butts of our spears into the ground and braced them with a foot. And waited.

This time, I wasn’t an observer. If I had been nervous before, I was terrified now. I could feel the fur standing up along my spine and all the way up to the top of my head. I kept telling myself that I was actually ten thousand miles away, in orbit. Didn’t help. My eyes told me the pigoid was ten meters away, charging at me at what appeared to be about half light speed.

Then the animal ran into the spear points. Still not breeding for intelligence, apparently. The spears bowed but held, and the animal slammed to the ground with a final squawk.

Bernie sidled up to it and poked it in the face a few times. Getting no response, he waved his spear in the air and yelled, “Whooo!”

The rest of us raised a fist and responded, “Hah!”

Well, that’s how the translation routine handled it. Deltan speech sounded more like pigs loudly wallowing. But the software converted everything to human equivalents for me, including names and colloquialisms.

Donald slapped me on the shoulder. “Come on, Robert, help me string it up.”

I tied the back legs of the pigoid, while Donald tossed the other end of the rope over a tree branch. He looked down to check my work before starting to haul and did a double take. “Whoa! That looks like one of Archimedes’ weird knots. Where’d you learn that?”

Oops. “Uh, from Archimedes, of course. He’s got hands and hands of different knots. I’ve picked up a few.”

Donald nodded, only mildly interested. We hauled on the rope until the pigoid was suspended—I made sure to use only normal Deltan-level strength and let Donald do most of the work—then he drew a flint knife and bled the animal. The other hunters started the Giving-Thanks chant.

When it was done, we trussed the carcass onto a couple of spears and started back to Camelot. There would be a feast tonight, and I loved barbecued pigoid. Still no barbecue sauce, though. I wondered idly if I should invent some.

We were singing a victory chant, and I guess our guard was down. So the group of Deltans that stepped into the path in front of us took us completely by surprise. We came to a ragged halt as they tilted their spears in our direction. It wasn’t quite a threat, more like the promise of one.

I heard a rustling behind me, and realized that we’d been surrounded. I took a quick look around. The other party outnumbered us by two. Not insurmountable, but definitely a concern. Very likely they were depending on getting the drop on us, and us not being able to organize a defense.

There had been reports of groups from Caerleon bushwhacking hunting parties, and taking all or part of their kills. It appeared we were the target du jour.

The spokesman for the group—I recognized him as an unpleasant character from Caerleon whose name translated as Fred—gave us an evil smile. “Nice catch, Donald. You’ve got a lot of pigoid there. I doubt you’d miss a haunch or two.”

Donald, unintimidated, raised his spear to readiness. “There are lots of pigoids out there, Fred. What’s the matter, not having any luck?” Fred reflexively started to take a step back, then caught himself. Donald wasn’t quite as big as his father, but that still left a lot of room for big. People rarely challenged him directly.

Unfortunately for me, I was standing up front with Donald, and I had designed my android to be as nondescript as possible—average height, average build, average looks—Joe Forgettable, pretty much. So, no surprise that Fred decided to use me as an example. He looked at me. “So what about you, kuzzi? You think you’d like to share the wealth?” He looked at his friends, smiling. They returned the expressions and moved in.

“Tell you what, Fred,” I answered. “Why don’t you bend way over, stick your head up your own butthole, and keep pushing until you disappear completely.” I smiled at him as innocently as I could. Snickers and guffaws from our group—and a few from the other group—showed that I’d scored. Of course, I had gigabytes of Earth literature and movies to pull my insults from. In a war of words, the Deltans would be virtually unarmed.

Donald gave me a quick, surprised glance. I guess he hadn’t been expecting the support. He showed his teeth. “Your move, pigoid-dropping.”

Fred glared at Donald, at me, then turned as if to leave.

Oh, you have got to be kidding. Cliché, much?

And, sure enough, he suddenly turned back and swung at me. I could have stopped and had afternoon tea, and still reacted in time. Okay, I’m a computer, but still…

I leaned back slightly and the clenched fist passed right by my face. As Fred continued the rotation, I placed a short jab in—well, in a human it would be the solar plexus. Same effect, though. Fred said oof and dropped to his knees.

Now their advantage was down to one, and we had Donald. Our guys grinned and started waving spear points.

Donald and I moved forward, and the other group stepped aside. As I passed Fred, he glared at me. I said, “Any time, kuzzi.” He didn’t respond, but then he was still trying to breathe.

There was a huge component of surrogate vengeance in my behavior, of course. I had a lot of years of being on the wrong end of bullying to look back on. But a rational part of my mind told me that I would have to watch out for Fred, now.

Donald slapped me on the back again. I made a point of staggering. I didn’t want him to decide we were competing.

We finished our hike to the village on high alert. No singing, no joking around. A couple of the guys took the kill to an agreed-upon fire pit to be divvied up. I turned to head back to Archimedes’ tent, but Donald put a hand on my shoulder and motioned me to come with him. I realized within moments that we were heading for the Council Circle.

One of the many universals that I’d discovered while studying the Deltans was that politicians and leaders always reserved the best for themselves. The Council Circle location got full sun first thing in the morning, and was in the shade by late afternoon. A few Council members were always at the circle, no doubt trying to look official and stay comfortable.

Donald walked up to Jeffrey, the current Council leader, and waited to be acknowledged. Jeffrey was a bit of a dick, and liked to keep people waiting, just to show how important he was. Donald accidentally stood in Jeffrey’s sun and began cleaning his spear while he waited, the dried pieces of blood and hide landing all around Jeffrey. I looked around and tried to keep a straight face.

Finally, Jeffrey accepted the fact that he was being out-ignored. He looked up and gestured for us to sit. We made ourselves comfortable and Donald explained about our encounter with the Caerleon gang.

When we were done, Jeffrey made a face. “That’s now almost a hand of encounters in the last three hands of days. A couple of people were stabbed when they refused to give up their kill. I’m going to have to bring this up with the full Council. Something has to be done.”

“All by people from Caerleon?” I asked.

“Yes, it looks that way. Leave it with me. I’ll get the Council started on it.”

Donald nodded to Jeffrey, and we got to our feet. As we walked away, I said to Donald, “Do you think it’s the one gang, or different ones?”

“Fred’s been mentioned more than once. There might be others involved, but it’s mostly him and his group.”

“And all lately? What’s changed?”

Donald stared into space for a moment. “Um, I don’t think it’s a case of something changing. It’s more likely that Fred just saw a way to take advantage of something that’s been brewing for a while. We’re just not sure what’s behind it.”

We walked in silence for a few moments while I thought through an idea. I looked up to Donald. “I have a plan. Can we get an extra dozen people or so? People who won’t mind some close-up action?”

Donald grinned. “Yeah, I think I can scrape that together.”

I grinned back. Time for some dirty tricks, Earth-style.





2. We’ve Lost



Howard

February 2217

Vulcan

Bridget opened the door, looking surprised. I hadn’t phoned ahead, and she wasn’t expecting me tonight.

She started to say, “Howard…what…” Then my expression must have registered.

“Howard, what’s wrong?” She grabbed my arm and dragged me into the apartment.

“We lost. We lost and now a billion sentients are going to die!” I collapsed onto her couch and leaned forward with my face in my hands.

“The Pav?”

I nodded, unwilling to trust my voice.

“My God, Howard. Does Butterworth know? Are the Bobs all right?”

I sighed, and tried for calm. “We lost a lot of Bobs, but there are backups. It’s not quite the same, of course.” I turned to Bridget and tried to smile reassuringly. “Riker let Dexter know, and Dexter will be passing the info along to Butterworth or whoever has taken over for him.”

“Are we in danger?”

“Not specifically, Bridget. The Others only know about Earth and Epsilon Eridani. But there are almost two hundred systems closer to GL 877 than us. All these worlds are ultimately in danger as long as the Others exist.”

“And the Pav? I’ve read some of Jacques’ blog entries. They sound like an interesting species. What happens to them?”

I closed my eyes for a moment, hoping maybe I’d be in a different universe when I opened them. No such luck.

“We’ve never seen the process, just the aftereffects. Now we’ll be getting a ringside view. The Others will kill off all life on the Pav home world using the Death Asteroids, then move in with ants and cargo carriers and strip the planet and the inner system of all metals. And they’ll collect all corpses and carcasses.”

I had to stop and take a few deep breaths. The android body didn’t need air, of course, but it was designed to react to emotion, and I was working myself up into a fine conniption.

“Jacques had a plan to rescue twenty thousand Pav, but the rest will be dead soon. And the Others will have wiped out another intelligent species, another entire planetary ecology.”

I turned on the couch to face her. “There will be a moot today, to try to figure out what we can do. I just wanted a few minutes…”

Bridget put her arms around me and pulled my head down to her shoulder. Soundlessly, I tried to cry without tear ducts.





3. Trouble Brewing



Marcus

November 2212

Poseidon

I rubbed the bridge of my nose with thumb and forefinger, shaking my head. Kal waited patiently at the other end of the call. I looked up to see Gina smirking at me. She smoothed her features out quickly, but come on—computer, remember? I gave her a quick smile in reply.

“Still not convinced, Marcus?” Kal cocked his head at me in the video window.

I sighed. “I guess I’ve been convinced for a while now, Kal. I just didn’t believe it, you know?”

Kal laughed. “Thus ending the myth that computers are logical.”

“Bite me. I was human once.” I sat back in my chair and considered my response. Spike picked that moment to jump into my lap for the obligatory chin-scritching. I gave her the proper adulation while I thought through my options. Kal and Gina wouldn’t even notice the millisecond pause in our conversation.

Kal was an Assistant Governor on Southern Mat Three, and Gina was a mid-level security officer. I’d become friends with both of them over the last couple of years. As we became more comfortable with each other, they’d each confided an increasing concern about the Council’s ongoing power grabs.

“Okay, so we’ll take it as a given that the Council is no longer even pretending that they’ll be instituting elections any time soon. Or at least not putting much effort into it. It’s not proof positive of a totalitarian government, but I’ll grant you it’s a pretty good indicator. Gina likes to shoot things at the first excuse, but Kal, you’re a lot more conservative. The fact that you’ve bought into this is what really scares me.”

Gina opened her mouth to retort, but Kal beat her to it. “Worst case, we’re a long way from crossing any kind of line. If the Council gets a sudden attack of sanity to the head, we’ll have done nothing indictable. Or even embarrassing. And yeah, Marcus, before we do anything that we can’t take back, I’ll want to take a good, long look at the situation.”

I nodded, mollified. The Poseidon Administrative Council was happy to make use of my services, but I had no real official position or authority. The moment I became a liability they could cut me loose. Not that I would be devastated by the snub. I wanted the colony to be self-sufficient, if for no other reason than so I could work on my projects in peace.

“What do you need from me, Kal?” I asked. “I’ve been steadily handing over functions to the administration for a decade now. If it came down to a showdown, I’m not sure I could even maintain control of the autofactories.”

“If it comes to that,” Kal responded, “you’re a wild card, and something the Council can’t control or interdict. At minimum, you’ll be a distraction. At best, you’ll be able to cause them significant stress.”

“Well, I always wanted to be a pain in the ass,” I replied.

“Mission accomplished.” Gina grinned at me. “But you’re also a public figure, and easy to track. We’ll have to be careful about what you’re seen doing.”

“Hmm.” I scratched my chin in thought. “There are a couple of things I can do about that, Gina. Let me work on it. And the public activity can be used as a red herring.” I grinned at her. “See, now you’ve got me doing it. Spies-R-Us. Jeez.”

We talked for a few more minutes, then ended the call. I sat back and stared into space, pondering my options. Like most nerds, I didn’t take naturally to intrigue and double-cross. But I could see some simple strategies that would make things a little more difficult for anyone trying to track me. Not to mention an opportunity to make my pet project relevant.

It might be time for a personal appearance. I leaned forward and placed a call to Howard.





4. Attitude



Howard

November 2217

Vulcan

I sat, slowly sipping my coffee, and watched the people go by. The mall was busy all the time, it seemed. But then, Landing didn’t have a whole lot of shopping malls. Okay, one. Original Bob had never had time for people-watching, and wouldn’t have been caught dead sitting around, doing nothing. Being immortal apparently put a different spin on things.

Clothing shops, electronics shops, specialty shops selling things like bath products; it all made me feel both at home and nostalgic for home. The familiarity kept bumping up against the simple fact that I was seventeen light-years from Sol, in a solar system that was originally the home of Mr. Spock. And on a planet that was destroyed in the movie reboot, but who’s counting?

Still, there was something about sitting at a table drinking coffee that made it all seem, well, mundane.

Bridget would be along soon. I’d elected to wait for her here rather than tag along to the office and be underfoot. Meanwhile, I was enjoying the sensation of being just some random Joe.

On my way now.

I smiled as I read the text in my heads-up. We’d made a point of not planning anything specific today. Lunch, walking around, no big deal.

Bridget showed up just as I finished the coffee. I stood, and we exchanged a quick kiss. She gave my hand a squeeze then sat down.

“I’m starved. Want to try the food court for lunch?”

“Food court?” My eyebrows rose. “A liquor baroness should have more refined tastes. Let’s splurge. How about the BrontoBurger? Or we could go for actual food.”

Bridget gave me the evil eye. “I happen to like bronto burgers, I’ll have you know.”

“Brontos, it is,” I declared. I stood, offered her my arm. Smiling, she stood and took it, doing a small curtsey.

As we aimed ourselves in the general direction of the desired eatery, I heard a comment from a few tables away. “Make sure you hold hands with mommy.” The comment was offered sotto voce, and may not have been intended for us to overhear, but the speaker, a zit-faced teenager, had miscalculated.

I dug in my heels and turned to glare at him, and Bridget put her other hand on my arm. “Howard, really? Consider the source.”

I looked at the twerp, who was grinning back at me. About 140 pounds soaking wet. Against an android with several times the reaction speed and strength of a human being. Not really a fair fight. I made a point of looking him up and down, then I laughed and turned away. I hoped he got the message.

Bridget, meanwhile, was dragging me by the hand. “Food. This way.”

“Right you are. Let us go forth and dine on the flesh of the alien bronto-like thing.”

We exchanged smiles and continued on our way, but the encounter bugged me. Bridget was now in her late fifties, biologically—the time spent in stasis during the voyage didn’t count. I, on the other hand, was built to look like Original Bob at thirty-one—his age when he died in a Las Vegas intersection. The mommy comment was, unfortunately, mathematically plausible.

But there was no way I would let Bridget be subjected to that kind of crap a second time.

* * *

Age hadn’t dulled Bridget’s appetite at all. She dove into her burger and fries as enthusiastically as any teenager. I ate at a more refined pace, enjoying the flavor but not needing the sustenance. Technically, it was a waste of food, but I did this so seldom, it hardly seemed worth worrying about.

“How are the kids?” I asked her, as much to slow down the carnage as out of a desire to know.

Bridget swallowed, wiped her mouth with a napkin, and glared at me. “You’re not fooling me, bucko. You always wait until I have a mouthful.” I grinned, unrepentant, and she continued. “Rosie is…well, you’ve met Rosie, you know what she’s like. She’s entitled to her opinion and you’re entitled to her opinion, as well.”

Bridget took another bite of bronto, frowning as she considered her next words. “I think it’s fair to say she doesn’t like our relationship. It’s not that she dislikes you personally, Howard. No more than she dislikes most people, I mean. But I think she’d prefer me to stay within my species. I’ve tried to talk to her about it, but, you know…”

I grinned at her. “There’s Rosie’s opinion, and then there’s…well, no, actually, there’s just Rosie’s opinion.”

“Yes, like that.” Bridget chuckled. “Well, I wanted my children to be self-reliant. Mission accomplished, I guess.”

“I’ve talked to Howie a couple of times, lately,” I replied, nibbling at my fries. “He’s a little more distant than he used to be, but I was ascribing that to him growing up and losing the hero worship.”

“There’s probably some of that, Howard, but there’s a lot more of Rosie. She won’t give it a rest.”

I shrugged. “Look, Bridget, I’ve made it clear any number of times that you come first. If I create problems for your personal life or your professional life or your family life, I’m gone.”

Bridget put down the pitiful remains of her burger and leaned forward. She looked me straight in the eyes, my cue to shut up and pay attention.

“Howard, my relationships are my business. No one else gets a vote. I loved Stéphane, and I’ve mourned him fully and properly. Now, I enjoy your company. And will continue to do so, despite a bitch of a daughter and some zit-faced mouthy mall-rat. Do you have something you’d like to add?”

“No, dear.” I grinned at her, and she rolled her eyes.

“Fine.” She cleaned up with the napkin and tossed it onto the mangled remains of her meal. “Then let’s go. I promised to get you some better clothes to drape on that android frame of yours.”

“Threatened.”

“What?”

“Threatened to get me better clothes.”

Bridget laughed and grabbed my hand to drag me off. Clothes shopping. Even death apparently wasn’t an escape.





5. Bushwhacked



Bob

March 2224

Delta Eridani

We hoisted the pigoid carcass up, suspended from spears, doing our best to act oblivious to the other group that we knew were watching us. I checked the monitor windows in my heads-up display. We definitely had a covert audience, and they outnumbered us twelve to six. I couldn’t tell my crew things I shouldn’t know, but I could be prepared in case the others did something unexpected.

As we started our march back to Camelot, I couldn’t help noticing that my crew were really, really terrible actors. Overly loud comments, uttered with exaggerated inflection, would have made a stage director up and quit on the spot.

I needn’t have worried, though. Fred and his gang probably weren’t listening anyway. They stepped out, front and rear, just like last time.

Fred looked at me, standing in lead spot, and smiled his nasty smile. “Well, Robert. I see you’ve caught my lunch for me. And you don’t have the big guy to protect you today. Why don’t you go ahead and put up a fight, this time? I’d like that.”

I cocked my head to the side. “Well, first, Fred, Donald didn’t need to protect me last time. You’re just not very good. And if it’s a fight you’re looking for, today’s your lucky day.”

And with that, eighteen Camelot hunters, including Donald, stepped out of the bush behind Fred’s gang. The Caerleon group went into a defensive crouch. Several of them tried to inch away and had to be poked with spear tips. In short order, we had them herded into a small group.

Fred sneered at me. “You think this is going to protect you? You won’t always have your friends around, kuzzi.”

“Neither will you, Fred.”

Fred jerked, taken aback. “What?”

“Just what I said. I can wait, and I can watch, and eventually you’ll go take a pee or something without your friends covering your ass.” I leaned in close. “And I’ll cut your throat before you even know I’m there.” I turned to the rest of the group. “This goes for all of you. You go to war with us, you’ll be watching your backs the rest of your lives. I never forget. And I never forgive.”

Fred laughed, a short sharp bark. “Nice talk. Nothing behind it, though.”

“Really?” I smiled at him, and before he could react, I jabbed him in the same place as last time. Down he went.

It wasn’t a fair fight, of course. I operated at computer speeds, and I was inhabiting an android body with electronic reflexes and several times the strength of a live Deltan. But a fair fight wasn’t the point. I wanted them to stop stalking Camelot hunting parties. I just needed to make their mortality clear to them.

I looked around at the Caerleon gang. They appeared a lot less defiant, now.

“Today, we’ll let you off with a warning. And without your spears. Next time, it’s going to hurt a lot more.” I signaled to a couple of the guys, and they began collecting spears. Fred’s gang was thoroughly cowed now, and didn’t put up any resistance.

We sent them off, then turned to head back to Camelot.

Donald walked beside me. “Damn, Robert, that was impressive. But I don’t think Fred is that easily dissuaded.”

“You’re right, Donald. But most of his followers will be. People like Fred need followers. I’m hoping this will pull his teeth.”

Donald nodded, then started up a marching chant, and everyone else joined in.

I wished I was as confident as I sounded.





6. Launch



Bill

January 2223

Epsilon Eridani

Garfield shook his head in awe. “It’s like those cartoon muscle cars when we were a kid—the ones that were all engine.”

The images in the video windows were indeed impressive. Epsilon Eridani 1, now in a completely new orbit around its sun, was surrounded by eight hundred mover plates. Trailing it by a million kilometers or so was one of the larger ex-moons of Epsilon Eridani 3, with a similar array of plates.

It had taken years to not only build all the equipment, but also to figure out how to control the assemblies. Forty supervisor AMIs were dedicated to maintaining and balancing the fields for each planet, in addition to the AMI in each plate.

And overseeing each planet would be my latest clones. They’d named themselves Daedalus and Icarus, which I privately thought was a little pretentious. But hey, it’s a free galaxy.

Garfield looked at me, his face flushed with excitement. “Short-range test complete. There’s a lot of room for error, but at minimum this setup is good for hundreds of Gs.”

I smiled and leaned back in my chair. “I guess we’re about ready, then.” A quick ping to Dae and Ick, and they popped into my VR.

“Okay, guys. Everything checks out. You’re clear that this is a Hail Mary, right?”

The two nodded. Daedalus replied, “Sure, but it’s worth trying. Worst case, we fail, and the Bobs are no worse off.”

“It’s a good opportunity to get some quiet time for some astrophysics work, too,” Icarus added with a smile.

I chuckled in reply. Icky had turned out very similar to me in temperament. Content to leave the exploration and fighting to others, he just wanted to work on his research.

I found myself a little ambivalent about Icarus and Daedalus. Cloning ourselves was always purposeful, of course. But I’d cloned these two for what could turn out to be a suicide mission. It felt unclean, somehow.

They knew exactly what I’d been thinking when I’d made the decision to go ahead. The pair gazed back at me with alert interest, no trace of blame or rancor on their faces. I decided I’d accept their judgment.

I hesitated, looking around the room. This was one of those moments that changed your life forever. Everything was ready to go. Time to fish or cut bait. “Okay, guys. The docking bays are ready for your ships. Connect up, hit the road, and Godspeed.”





7. Date



Howard

November 2217

Omicron2 Eridani

We walked out of the movie theater, arm in arm. Bridget looked as gorgeous as always. She turned and whispered in my ear, and as usual, my brain turned to mush.

“You look very dignified, Howard. But you really didn’t have to do that.”

I shrugged. Modifying the android’s appearance was a trivial operation. Avoiding a situation that might make Bridget uncomfortable was top priority. My apparent age now matched hers perfectly.

Changing the subject, I said, “That wasn’t bad. There might be a future in this movie theater fad.”

“Yes, civilization has finally reached Vulcan. Next up—discos.”

“No, please, no.”

There wasn’t exactly a booming movie industry, of course. Vulcan was very much a frontier planet, and the economy was still bootstrapping through the basic requirements. We’d be another couple of decades before leisure activities became a major market segment.

But Hollywood, and its various satellite locations and spiritual brethren, had produced thousands of movies of varying quality and popularity. And generally speaking, the holders of the copyrights were many light-years away, and almost certainly quite dead as well. Someone in Landing eventually had the bright idea to open a local theater and play themed double-bills. It was brilliant, as far as I was concerned. And the general population, who had spent most of their previous lives in isolated, claustrophobic enclaves, were taking to the new medium with enthusiasm.

Today’s fare, a couple of zombie movies, had been sold out. The audience was loud, opinionated, and mostly sneeringly amused. But no one left early.

I leaned close. “I feel a hankering for brains. Or sushi.”

Bridget laughed and opened her mouth to respond, but at that moment her phone buzzed. Two seconds later, I received an email. From the coroner’s office.

I read the email in my heads-up display, and stopped dead in my tracks. Bridget looked up from her phone, tears in her eyes. “Oh, Howard, no…”

* * *

“He left this note for you,” Dr. Onagi said. He pushed an envelope across the desk to me. Numbly, feeling like someone else was in control, I picked up the note and opened it. I held it so that Bridget could see.



Howard;

I recently had occasion to visit the doctor, as I’ve been having issues with my memory and cognition. The news was less than pleasing. It would seem that I have a particularly nasty form of neurological degenerative dementia, one that is not curable. The doctor informs me that the process is already significantly advanced.

I’ve contacted a few experts, and I was assured that this issue cannot be corrected in software. Under the circumstances, I don’t see becoming a cognitively impaired replicant as an attractive option.

My one remaining freedom is the ability to choose the manner of my passing.

Howard, you’ve been a good friend over the years. Please don’t think less of me for my decision.



Sincerely,

George Butterworth (Colonel, USE, ret’d.)



Bridget cried silently, tears running down her cheeks. I stared at Dr. Onagi, numb. “How…”

“A neurotoxin. Painless, and quick.”

“Could he still be scanned?”

Dr. Onagi shook his head. “Even if it was medically possible, he had revoked consent.”

I nodded and stood up. “Thank you, Dr. Onagi.”

Bridget dried her eyes, stood, and followed me out of the office.

* * *

We still hadn’t built the capability to cry into Manny the android. Too bad—I would have liked the release. Again. It might be time to bump up the priority on adding the capability, although it would be better if I just had fewer reasons to need it.

We sat on Bridget’s couch, arms wrapped around each other. Bridget had cried herself out. I would catch up as soon as she went to bed and I could return to VR.

“People keep leaving,” I finally said into the silence. Bridget looked up at me and I met her eyes. “I know it’s normal. Your parents die, grandparents, people who’ve been around all your life. Eventually, you die, and that’s that. But when you’re immortal, you’re always on the receiving end. It’s just one hit after another.”

“But you meet new people,” Bridget said.

“And eventually, they leave. After a while, I think you’d get gun-shy.” I smiled at Bridget, a wan smile at best. “I’m less standoffish than most Bobs, as a rule. But in this case, I think the others have the right of it. This gulf exists between immortals and what the Bobs are starting to refer to as ephemerals, for a reason.”

Bridget searched my face. “Do you think of me as an ephemeral?”

“I think you’re the most important thing in the universe. And that’s the problem. Eventually, you’ll die, and I’ll be alone, again.” I sighed and stood. “I’m sorry, Bridget. I’m being a real Dickie Downer, tonight. I think I should leave and let you get some sleep.”

Bridget grabbed my arm. “Please don’t. Just stay with me, here. I don’t want to be alone.”

Without a word, I sat back down, and put my arms around her again. She put her head on my shoulder and sighed. We sat there quietly, not moving or talking. At some point, I realized that she’d fallen asleep. And that was fine, too.





8. Revolutionaries



Marcus

June 2214

Poseidon

For the third time, I raised my hand to knock. And dropped it. I remembered Howard had mentioned a problem with stage fright, the first time he’d gone out in public using an android. I wasn’t sure if I hadn’t believed him, or just hadn’t taken him seriously. Either way, someone owed someone an apology.

And this would be my first public appearance with the new android form. After years of operating through video windows and telephone calls, I was finally going to meet my best friends on this world, face to face.

If I could just manage to knock on the door.

With a growl, I consciously set aside all my insecurities and rapped three times. The door opened immediately—I knew they’d been expecting me, but I had a sudden image of Kal, waiting on the other side of the door with his hand on the knob, waiting for me to act.

“So, the great computer in the sky deigns to visit us poor mortals.” He grinned down at me. My android was the same height as Original Bob—six foot one—but Kal towered over me, as he did over almost everyone.

“Oh, bite me, Kal. Who’s here already?”

Kal stepped aside and motioned me in. “Denu and Gina. Vinnie will be a bit late. He got caught up in some Council thing.”

I walked into the living room of Kal’s small apartment. It was a constant source of frustration that, on a planet with so much space, people were crowded into such concentrations. Granted, most of the planet was water, but there were enough mats—and now, enough floating cities—so that people could spread out. The Council’s insistence that everyone stay together had lately become a planetwide source of contention. I wondered how much of that was natural, and how much was helped along by the rabble-rousers in this room.

I sat down, to find Gina and Denu staring at me. Denu said, “Damn, that’s impressive. Marcus, if I didn’t know better, I wouldn’t have given you a second glance. Completely believable.”

I shrugged. “Several other Bobs have been working on the design for a couple of years now. I’m late to the party. Got my own priorities, you know?”

Gina and Denu nodded, and Kal snorted.

At that moment, there was a knock on the door, and Vinnie walked in without waiting, wearing a furious expression. Clearly, the Council thing had not gone well.

“Idiots! Morons!” Vinnie exclaimed. He grabbed a beer from the fridge, then threw himself down on the couch.

“Come on in, Vinnie. Grab yourself a brew,” Kal said to him with a grin.

Vinnie lifted the beer in salute. “Sorry. You know how it is with Council.”

“So…”

Vinnie popped the tab on the can while giving Kal the Spock eyebrow. “So they have absolutely refused to consider any changes to their policies. They dismiss issues of public morale as ‘fear-mongering’. All I could get from them was a rote reiteration of their ‘all for one’ standard speech.” Vinnie paused and drained half the can. “Absent some kind of direct threat, they aren’t budging. This is the future, folks.”

Gina turned and looked at me. “So, big guy, I guess this is it. You said to exhaust all other avenues, first. I think we’ve done that. It’s time for a change of leadership. And since the Council keeps putting off elections as ‘low priority’ and a ‘distraction’, I’d say that’s out the window as well.”

I rubbed my forehead with one hand, then found myself gazing distractedly at my hand. The action felt significantly different than in VR, although I couldn’t put my finger on exactly how. I shelved that thought for later, when I had some free time.

I looked at Gina, who was still waiting for an answer. “Umm, I’ll grant that you’ve gone through all your alternatives, but I don’t think I have, yet. Guys, I really do not want to become a revolutionary. People die in revolutions, even in the so-called peaceful ones.” I looked around at the others, meeting their eyes one by one. “I have the flying cities almost ready for the big reveal. I think that might shake things up enough without the need for shooting people and blowing things up.”

“Will you present that as a threat, or keep it for a surprise?”

“Honestly, Kal, it’s not really much of a threat,” I replied, “at least on paper. Rethink your ways or we’ll produce flying cities. Lacks a certain something, know what I mean?”

Kal chuckled ruefully. “Okay, yeah. It may be more of a threat after it’s implemented and we start to see some of the fallout. Until then, the Council is only going to see what they want to see.”

“Still, you have to try,” Denu added. “Present it to them, and if they don’t get the point, oh well.”

Gina went to the fridge and retrieved a beer. She waved it at Denu before apparently realizing that was a bad idea with an unopened carbonated beverage. “Marcus’ point, though, is that we’d like to avoid the full-scale revolution option, so oh well as an attitude is not helpful.” She turned to me. “And stop being such a wuss.”

Denu and I both grinned at her. Good ol’ quiet, un-opinionated Gina.

“Okay,” Kal looked around the room. “So Marcus will go talk to the Council and try to convince them that their totalitarian policy is not supportable. If they listen to reason, great. If not, we proceed on the cities thing anyway, without official approval.”

We each nodded, silently. As plans went, it lacked something. But it was better than a shooting war.

* * *

“Not acceptable!” Councilor Benben’s face in the video window could only be described as thunderous. I tried to avoid grinning. To say that my proposal was meeting resistance would be a massive understatement.

Councilor Murray cut in from another window, “We are finally getting close to aligning populations with labor requirements on the mats and cities. If people start moving around haphazardly, or even emigrating to some other living arrangement, it will mean chaos. There aren’t enough people to do all the required work. We need them to live where they’re needed.”

“Leaving aside,” I responded, “the question of whether it’s morally acceptable to tell people where they should live and what job they should do.”

“It’s the law, Marcus.”

I smiled at Councilor Brennan. “Which simply sidesteps the statement. Anything can be passed into law. That doesn’t make it right. Plus there’s the question of the agreement you signed with Riker before we shipped you out here. It sets out—”

“That document is not legally binding,” Brennan replied. “We’ve already voted on that.”

“So you can just vote any agreement you don’t like null and void on your own dime, then vote in whatever else you want. And everyone else is just supposed to go along because it’s the law?”

Murray looked down his nose at me. Really. Literally. “Saying it with a sneer isn’t a rebuttal, Mr. Johansson. I think we’re pretty clear on this. No flying cities. Possibly at some point in the future, but we will make that decision, not you.” He looked around, likely gauging the mood of the other councilors from his end. “And I think we’re done here. Good day.”

And he switched off. Within a second or two, the other councilors did the same.

I sat back in my office chair and shook my head. Done? Hardly. There was a scene in Demolition Man, where the police captain couldn’t conceive the possibility that someone might not follow orders. The Council’s reaction had that flavor.

I sent a quick text to the Revolutionary Council: Kal, Denu, and Gina.

I tried. They dug in their heels. Looks like we’ll be doing this the hard way.

* * *

I didn’t really want to bother Bill or Riker. Or Bob, for that matter. They each had their own problems to deal with. I supposed that the Others could eventually become my problem as well, but for now, I had the local issue to deal with.

I checked my android’s current location. I’d loaded it into a cargo drone after the meeting at Kal’s, and ordered the drone into orbit around Poseidon. I directed the drone to West Mat Four, with instructions to inform me when it arrived.

The population of the mats hadn’t really dropped much, yet. Only a few floating cities had been constructed, and the Council didn’t feel the need to make them residential. Essential personnel and industry, only. Yet another reason why the public was getting tired of the Council. When we first decanted the colonists, there had been an expectation that living on the mats would be necessary for only a decade or so, maximum. And would be gradually phased out in favor of manufactured floating cities during that interval. Now, twenty years later, more than ninety percent of the human population of Poseidon still made their homes on the mats.

I got a ping from the drone and smiled. After only a few days of having my own android, I found myself using any excuse to go walkabout.

It took only a moment to activate the android, and I found myself draped over the support rack. I opened the cargo doors and walked out into sunshine.

Weather on the mats wasn’t typically a problem. The colonists had made a point of settling mainly on the mats caught in the tropical zone. In the absence of any land whatsoever, Poseidon’s oceans had settled into bands similar to Jupiter. Each band had a small but distinct difference in temperature, ecology, and even salinity.

Rainstorms swept across the mats frequently, but they were mild, warm, and short. The occasional major storm could be seen developing days in advance, and a series of drones were in place to tow affected mats out of the way.

I walked the short distance to the edge of the landing pad and joined pedestrian traffic. New Georgia was a small town by any measurement, and it exuded that flavor. People knew each other, no one seemed to be in a hurry, and there was no feeling of crowding, at least out in public. It was a measure of the perversity of human nature that the biggest complaint people had about living here was that they weren’t given a choice.

I sighed to myself and set off in a random direction. I didn’t have a goal; I simply wanted to enjoy the day.

It took fewer than five minutes for my day to be ruined.

An internal buzz indicated an incoming call. Metadata showed it was from Kal. I connected, audio only. “What’s up, Kal?”

“The Council apparently wasn’t satisfied with just telling you no. They’ve taken steps…”

“Ooh, steps.” I snickered. “What’ve they done?”

“Shut down anything that might be a source of supplies for us. Reallocated any personnel that might be helping, and moved them. Including Gina and Denu. And changed all the printer schedules.”

“Gina and Denu are going along with it?”

“Yes,” he replied. “There’s no real point in digging in their heels right now. We’ll just talk by phone a lot more.”

“Hmm, I wonder if that’s the point?” I rubbed my chin in thought.

“What?”

“Surveillance, Kal. If we’re talking over the comms system, they might be monitoring.”

“Huh.” Kal was silent for a few moments. “And of course, if they pass a law, it’s legal. And therefore ethical.”

“Something like that. And on that subject, we should probably hang this one up.”

“Gotcha. Coming over?”

“You got it, buddy. I’ll be there in half an hour.” I hung up the call, then checked my roamer inventory. If the Council was willing to tap calls, they might be willing to plant bugs as well. Time to get serious.

* * *

“What the—” Kal jerked back as he opened the door. I grinned at him, unrepentant. I had kept the roamers in my pockets on the walk over, but as we Bobs like to point out, we’re not very mature. More than a dozen small roamers crawled over my clothing, and one stood on my head, doing a jig.

Kal stepped aside, shaking his head. “You really are a bastard.”

Chuckling, I ordered the roamers to sweep the room. “This’ll take only a minute or two.”

The roamers scampered down my body and scattered around the room. It took less than a minute to find three bugs. Kal and I looked at each other in stunned silence. It was one thing to talk about the possibility, quite another to discover the reality.

A couple of roamers quietly destroyed the listening devices, while their compatriots continued to search.

In the end, they discovered only the three. Kal let out a noisy breath. “Unbelievable. The lack of elections, the lack of free choice, and now this. We’re definitely over the line into totalitarianism.”

“Mm. I’m going to leave a couple of roamers here to watch for further attempts, and I’ll deliver some squads to everyone else’s home. Gina will go ballistic, of course.”

“She’s in security, Marcus. If she’s being monitored and doesn’t know about it, then she’s out of the loop. And that doesn’t bode well.”

I shook my head. “Consider the possibility that this is a regular thing, and she’s just not high enough in the bureaucracy to know about it. That’s sort of worse in a different way, of course.”

Kal waved off the comment. “Yeah, fine. Now, flying cities?”

“Given the Council’s reaction at my meeting with them, I think just introducing the cities will be provocative enough,” I replied. “And if not, if they do nothing, we win by default.”

“And for now, we just lie low?”

I nodded. “The fun will come to us, I think.” I pulled an item out of my backpack. “Meanwhile, here’s our new communication system. SCUT tech, encrypted, and infested with nanites. If someone tries to dick with it, they’ll get a nasty surprise.”

Kal took the device, carefully touching it only with the ends of his fingers.

I laughed at his obvious discomfort. “Come on, buddy, give me some credit. The nanites will recognize attempted tampering. You’re fine.”

He shrugged and gave me a lopsided grin. “Denu and Gina getting the same thing?”

I nodded. “Mm, no matter what we do, the phone system won’t be secure. We can’t protect it end-to-end.”

Kal sighed and placed the comm unit on his desk. “Remember that line I said we hadn’t crossed?”

“Uh-huh.” I nodded. “I can see it in my rear-view mirror. We are now officially revolutionaries. Yeehah.”





9. Tension



Howard

February 2218

Vulcan

“You should leave my mother alone.”

I’d been casually examining a store-front display at the mall, so the comment, coming out of nowhere, made me jump. I turned around to find Rosie, Bridget’s eldest daughter, glaring at me.

“What?” Oh, great comeback, Howard. Brilliant.

“You’re a machine. You’re not even human. My mother needs to get over the death of my father, and move on. But not with a machine.”

Here we go. My fertile and somewhat anxiety-ridden imagination had pictured something like this. I wasn’t particularly happy about the validation. “Rosie, the two aren’t mutually exclusive. I, the real me, am human. I—”

“Spare me all the scientific double-talk. You’re a recording of a human. I’m not interested in debating the issue. I’m—”

“Then why are we even talking?”

“What?” Rosie blinked rapidly and drew back slightly. I seemed to have managed to derail whatever speech she was gearing up to. I noted out of the corner of my eye that we were attracting an audience. Several passersby had stopped to watch the drama, and at least one person had their phone out. I wondered if I qualified as a celebrity.

“Rosie,” I continued, trying to ignore the gawkers. “You may not be interested in a debate, but I’m equally not interested in standing here being lectured at. To coin a phrase that was around when I was young, you’re not the boss of me. And, more to the point I think, your mother is freely choosing to associate with me.”

“And I’ve told her exactly what I think of that!” Rosie was almost spitting the words. “But you’ve gotten her all twisted around—”

“Oh, freakin’ hell!” I exclaimed, rolling my eyes. “Have you met your mother? Have you ever tried to get her to do something she didn’t want to?” I waved a hand dismissively. “Look, I don’t want to get into a confrontation with you. Mostly out of respect for your parents, both of whom I love, and loved, dearly. But Bridget is an adult, and able to make her own decisions. I’ll stop seeing her when she says so. You don’t get a vote.”

And that was it. We stood there, glaring at each other, any hope of discussion or understanding pretty much skewered, possibly permanently. After a few more moments of impasse, Rosie sneered at me and wordlessly stalked off.

Well, isn’t that just peachy.

I looked around at the small crowd that had gathered. No one would meet my eyes, and they swiftly dispersed.

I resumed my aimless wandering, trying to get back into the window-shopping mood, but couldn’t put Rosie out of my mind. And some of the looks from my erstwhile audience had been hostile. Obviously I had been recognized. I began to wonder what I would do if this drama spilled over onto Bridget.

* * *

We were sitting on Bridget’s couch while I recounted my earlier experience at the mall.

“I didn’t tell you because it isn’t your problem, Howard.” Bridget looked sad, but not apologetic. “My kids, mostly Rosie, I think, would like to see me dating someone less, uh, biologically challenged. She’s started lecturing me on the subject whenever I see her. Lianne and Howard mostly stand around looking uncomfortable.”

“Wonderful. Is there anything else you aren’t telling me?”

She smiled at me. “Well, there is a certain amount of gossip going around. Some of the more interesting items involve questions about your equipment. So to speak.”

I couldn’t help it. I started to laugh helplessly. Thanks to the very authentic proprioceptive circuits in the android, I had to sit down or risk falling over. For maybe the tenth time, I made a note to myself to install tear ducts.

Bridget grinned, sharing the moment. “And on that subject…”

“Oh, no you don’t. I’ve already told you that I’ll upgrade Manny any time you say the word. That’s on you.”

Now Bridget was laughing, too. The hilarity fed back on itself until we were both lying back on the furniture, gasping for breath and whooping helplessly.

Finally, after a minute or two, we both managed to recover control. Bridget took my hand. “And that’s one of the reasons why I love you. Even Stéphane often just looked at me like I had a screw loose. I had to bite back a lot of my more lowbrow humor. With you, well, you get it.”

“Minds together in the gutter, forever.” I smiled at her. My God, she was beautiful.

* * *

The internet hadn’t really changed that much in two hundred years. Oh, there were new companies, and old companies had gone out of business. A lot of the jargon had changed. But people were still people, and still had the same interests. There were still forums, you could still follow someone, everyone still had a personal landing page on any of several different platforms, and blogs were still popular. Apparently narcissism and voyeurism were still alive and well.

The point, though, was that it didn’t take a lot of effort to track down some commentary relating to the locally famous—or perhaps infamous—replicant. My android persona wasn’t any kind of a secret, and had become a small but persistent topic of conversation. And there were enough pictures posted to make me recognizable if someone cared enough.

There was no shortage of opinions on the subject, although they appeared to be about evenly split. I was either some kind of Frankenstein’s Monster, or I was just some guy who had the same right to exist as everyone else. There didn’t really seem to be any middle ground.

It looked like my relationship with Bridget was the real sticking point. Most people were okay with me just wandering around, visiting malls and such. But they drew the line at me dating outside my chemical family.

It was unlikely that Bridget was unaware of this. That meant she was protecting me. Crap. I was just chauvinistic enough to want to be the one doing the protecting.

I wondered if she had a plan. Or, more importantly, if I had one. Someone needed to deal with this.





10. Hunted



Bob

March 2224

Camelot

Deltans couldn’t whistle while they worked. Or any other time, really—otherwise I’d have been belting out a tune. This was the kind of day that would bring a celebration to the lips of any but the grumpiest. Up with the dawn, a breakfast of berries and eggs, a couple of hours warming ourselves in the morning sun… My android body didn’t require any of that, of course, but the neural interface was more than good enough to give me the same pleasurable experience as anyone else.

After a morning of indolence, I went hunting while Archimedes laid out his flintwork for the day. With a little luck, I hoped to bag the local equivalent of a turkey.

Archimedes and his family were more than generous, and had treated me like one of them right from the start. I wanted to give back whenever possible. A turkey or other small game once in a while was a welcome treat.

Marvin occasionally accused me of trying to deny reality and become Robert full-time. I didn’t argue with him—there was at least some truth to the accusation. I certainly felt far more a part of the Deltan life than I had back on Earth as Original Bob. Missing my family so much probably played into my effectively having gone native.

In the middle of my idle ruminations, my heads-up display flashed an alert. Movement in the immediate vicinity. I called up one of the many spy drones that kept my Camelot VR up to date, and redirected it to center on me.

At computer speeds, it took less than a second overall to realize that I wasn’t being stalked by wildlife.

It was Fred. And four friends. And they were obviously intent on me.

I could just busterize them, of course. But even with an obnoxious tard like Fred, I couldn’t stomach casual murder. I could also very likely take them on and win, but it would completely blow my cover. I’d be done as Archimedes’ friend, Robert, the generic Deltan. Not an option.

Could I call for help? No, by the time I got a drone to Archimedes, then he found Donald or someone, then they got here, the excitement would be over. I was on my own.

I called up two more drones so that I would have good coverage, then observed my pursuers for a few moments. They knew generally where I was, but I could see that they were often looking or moving in a direction that was slightly off my line. That suggested possibilities.

My strategy started with turning off my scent. Deltans made heavier use of the sense of smell than humans, and less use of sight. I could take advantage of that.

I positioned myself between two of my stalkers, and went as still and quiet as only an android could, as they moved past my position. With no movement, sound, or odor, I simply didn’t register.

Now I was behind them.

I noted Fred’s position and moved around the perimeter until I was close to him. If he moved away from the group at any point, he was mine.

The cordon eventually tightened until everyone could see each other. Fred threw his spear down with rage.

“We had him! By the balls of my ancestors, how in the next life did you let him get through?”

“How do you know it wasn’t you, Fred?” One of the hunters, apparently fed up, challenged him.

In a streak, Fred moved in and knocked the speaker to the ground. He picked up his victim’s spear and held it to the Deltan’s neck.

“Mouth me off like that again and we’ll be serving you for dinner, kuzzi.”

Wow, what a jerk. It occurred to me that I might be doing the Deltan species a favor by removing him from the gene pool.

The hunters cast around for a few more minutes, but I simply moved out of their range and watched from the drones. Eventually they gave up and started back toward Caerleon, with Fred mouthing off constantly.

I followed them about halfway to the other village, but sadly, Fred stayed with the group all the way. I’d have to arrange a meeting myself.



I returned all surveillance systems to normal and headed back toward Camelot. A quick command to a couple of drones ensured that I wouldn’t be taken by surprise by anything. This whole situation would require some thought, and I knew myself well enough to realize that I could walk right off a cliff when I got into this mode.

I walked along, looking down at my feet as I thought. Fred was truly evidence that jerks came in all shapes, sizes, and species. But what was setting him—and the rest of them—off like this? They weren’t behaving this way for the fun of it. The behavior was too consistent for pranks. They had the same hunting prospects as us, the same access to tubers—maybe even a little better than Camelot in that area.

I made a note to check out Caerleon using drones. Maybe I could pick out something significant.

I still had the unfinished chore of hunting lunch, though. And I’d wasted far too much time waltzing with Fred and his goons. With a shake of the head, I sent my drones out to look for some small game in the area. It was cheating, but I was running behind, and people gotta eat.

* * *

“Sounds like Fred took it personally.” Donald grinned at me.

“Well, no one likes being punched out. But I didn’t expect him to come hunting for me.”

Donald and I were sunning ourselves at Archimedes’ flint-working site, while he did his best to ignore the two of us. Buster worked with his father, roughing out some of the easier tools for Archimedes to finish later. Buster had little interest in flint working as a career path, although he had his father’s dexterity and was pretty decent with the basics. Buster liked to hunt, and his weapon of choice was a bow and arrow. He was easily the best shot in the village—possibly in both villages.

But Buster also loved hanging with his father, and if helping with the day’s work sped things along, then that’s what he’d do.

These three were very probably my favorite people on the planet.

“Too bad he didn’t give you the chance to slit his throat. You’d be doing everyone a favor.”

I shifted my position while I considered my reply. I doubted I could just coldly cut someone’s throat, but how to explain that twenty-first-century sensibility to stone-age beings?

“The thing is, Donald, we know it’s not just Fred. He may be taking to it with enthusiasm, but there’s more to this.”

“Mmm.” Donald lay back with his hands behind his head. The tone said that Donald would have no trouble skewering Fred next time they met. “Might be just about time that we go on a hunt of our own. Maybe ask a few questions.”

Well, that wasn’t a bad idea. Except for the ‘we’ part.





11. Remains



Bill

March 2223

Epsilon Eridani

I was making some modifications to Bullwinkle when I got a ping from Mario. I gave my roamers instructions that would keep them busy for a while, and rematerialized my VR.

Mario popped in a moment later. He turned to Jeeves, who had appeared at his elbow, and requested a coffee, then sat down and gazed at me.

“Okay, Mario, I know you well enough to realize the inscrutable act always means trouble. What’s up?”

He looked down and smiled, acknowledging the score. “Yeah, okay. Uh, I’m not sure where to begin.” Mario took a sip of his drink, then put it down and laced his fingers together. “You know we’ve been continuing to scout the stars around GL 877, trying to map out the Others’ depredations.”

I nodded. “I’m guessing the dramatic pause isn’t to give me good news.”

“Hah!” Mario shook his head. “If anything, they’ve been more active in the other direction. Probably a combination of luck and proximity of the stars in that area. Anyway, we’ve found five other life-bearing planets that they’ve depopulated, including another civilization. Late industrial, early atomic era. About equivalent to Earth in the mid-twentieth.”

“Wonderful. So the Others have yet another notch on their collective holster.”

“And another nail in their coffin. Bill, I know I’m probably preaching to the choir, but I don’t see any resolution to this that involves the Others continuing to exist.”

“Yeah, I know. It’s been discussed. You know it has. And we’re the ones who will have to do it, assuming we even can.”

“There’s Daedalus and Icarus…”

“Long shot.” I waved a hand at Mario. “What about you and your clones? You’re closest. Anything you could do?”

Mario smiled without any humor. “Sure. Except, by some enormous coincidence, there’s no metal to be had anywhere around GL 877.”

“Okay, got it.”

Mario was right, of course. The home system of the Others was out at the periphery of explored space. By definition, since exploration had pretty much stopped once we’d discovered them.

“Claude and a large number of the Bobs from the Delta Pavonis defense are heading for Gamma Pavonis. Maybe you can arrange something with them.” Mario looked at me with one eyebrow raised.

I nodded, then grimaced. “I’ll do that, Mario, but I think Claude took the defeat really hard. I’m not sure he’s going to be entirely rational where the Others are concerned. His talk was all about defending Gamma.”

“Well, you have a few more years until his group gets to Gamma. Maybe come up with a sales pitch.”

I sighed. If there was a hell, it was in sales.





12. Funeral for Julia



Riker

October 2218

Vulcan

I was going through the latest production reports from Charles, when I received a call from Justin Hendricks. With a smile, I dropped the reports. Talking to family was always top of the priority list. Justin had grown up; Space Cadet Justin was now a ship’s captain in the New Jerusalem Space Corps. The thought brought a chuckle. The space corps consisted of a half-dozen cargo and transport vessels, based loosely on the version 2 Heaven design.

Dexter, the current Bob-in-residence, had been aggressive about making the colonies independent of replicant support. The Omicron2 Eridani system’s twin planets now featured settlements from twelve different enclaves, and all of them had at least one vessel. Dexter was still hanging around the system, but demands on his time were down to a couple of items a week.

I had a smile on my face as I picked up the call, but lost it when I saw his expression. Justin’s eyes were glistening with barely-controlled tears.

“Uncle Will, it’s Mom. She’s in the hospital. It’s bad.”

* * *

I stepped out of the cargo drone and looked up at the hospital building. Then I looked down at my hands, and at my feet. Howard had lent me Manny without hesitation, when he heard. It took slightly more than an hour to fly Manny from Vulcan to Romulus.

This was my first time in an android, and I was nervous. It occurred to me that Howard’s first use of Manny was because of very similar circumstances. I hoped that wasn’t a trend. Sadly, with ephemerals, it probably was.

I saw Justin come out the front doors of the hospital, so I stepped away from the drone and sent it off. Justin hurried up to me, then stopped five feet away, suddenly bashful. This was the first time we’d met ‘in person’, so to speak.

“Uncle Will,” he said, blushing slightly. “You, uh, you look younger on the phone.”

I smiled. “Stage lighting.” I wasn’t about to try to explain Howard and Bridget. Assuming he didn’t already know about them.

He turned and we walked back toward the hospital entrance. I spared a quick glance in his direction. For the first time, I noticed wrinkles forming around his mouth and on his forehead. A few gray hairs, too. With an effort of will, I pulled myself away from that line of thought as Justin filled me in.

“She was at home, and suddenly she held her head, screamed, and collapsed. She was babysitting my kids, and fortunately they knew what to do.” Justin’s eyes were wide and staring as he talked. “The ambulance got there in moments, and brought her here. But I think it was already too late.” He looked at me, tears now in his eyes. “It’s an aneurysm. The doctors say there’s no way she’s going to wake up.”

We arrived at her room, and I took a moment to look around. Very modern equipment, and no overt religious images or icons. Of course, there had been a popular uprising about twenty years ago, something to do with free importing of alcohol, and possibly a scandal or two… Anyway, New Jerusalem was now a proper democracy with separation of church and state. Howard and I had celebrated by scanning a bottle of Irish whiskey and bringing the template into VR.

Well, I was procrastinating, and I knew it. I took a deep breath and walked slowly up to the bed.

I remembered the first time I’d seen Julia Hendricks, on a video call with Minister Cranston. I remembered the stomach-dropping shock as I looked at an almost perfect likeness of my sister, Julia’s several-times-great-grandmother. She still looked like Andrea, like Andrea would have looked had I been alive to see her as a grandmother. I reached down, put my hand against Julia’s cheek. The first time I’d ever touched her.

Well, it seems Howard finally installed tear ducts. Damn.

I wiped my eyes, then turned to Justin. Tears were running freely down his face.

It took several attempts to get my voice to work. “What will you do?”

“She didn’t want to be kept alive if there was no chance…”

I nodded, infinite sadness washing over me. People keep leaving…

“I guess, with the aneurysm, there’s no chance of replication?”

Justin shook his head. “Uncle Will, don’t take this personally, but I don’t think very many people will ever choose replication. It was an experiment designed in a darker, more authoritarian time, when people were seen as just replaceable cogs.” He smiled sadly at me. “And the amount of work you and the other Bobs have put in—well, it looks to the average person like permanent servitude. Who wants to spend their whole afterlife doing chores?”

“Ah, that explains a lot.” I nodded in thought. “Once Howard resurrected the technology, we were kind of expecting an onslaught of requests. We’ve gotten zip.”

“I think you are probably the end of the experiment.”

I said nothing, just looked down at Julia. Maybe just as well.

* * *

The funeral was held within a few days. I was still borrowing Howard’s android. There was no chance of confusion—Howard had never been on Romulus in android form. These people only knew Will, the many-greats grand-uncle in software. Justin asked me to be a pallbearer, which I gratefully accepted.

Julia had lived a good life, and had many relatives, all of whom knew and loved her. Justin’s eulogy left not a dry eye in the place—including yours truly.

I was the center of attention for most of the reception. Many people wanted to know about my sisters, and about life in the 21st century. No questions about replication, though. Go figure.

Finally, emotionally exhausted, I said my goodbyes and called the cargo drone. I turned and waved to the small crowd that came outside with me, stepped into the cargo drone, and switched off.

* * *

I popped into Howard’s VR. “Hey, Howard. Manny’s all yours again. He’s flying back from Romulus. Be there in a few hours.”

“Thanks. Funeral go okay?”

I sat and made a spot for Spike. She took the invitation, and began to purr before I even started petting her. Spike was never very good at hard-to-get.

I sighed, and stared into space for a few moments. “No confrontations or anything. Not like you and the kids…” I gave him a quick glare. “I guess that’s kind of settled down?”

“Mmm, yeah, Bridget had words with her offspring. I don’t think Rosie will seek me out to yell at me anymore.”

“You know you’re asking for it, don’t you? Dating a human…”

“It’s not really dating, Will. There’s no sexual component. We enjoy each other’s company. We always have. We get each other.”

I nodded in sympathy. “I know what you mean. But lips will flap.”

Howard laughed. “Screw ’em. I’m happier than I’ve been since, hmm, since before Jenny, actually.”

“Jenny’s long dead, Howard. Eventually, Bridget will be as well.” I shrugged apologetically at Howard’s sharp look. “Sorry, I think the funeral has me a little down. Just a year after we lost the colonel. Ephemerals, indeed.”

“Yeah…” Howard reached over and gave Spike a quick pat. “Immortality sure isn’t all upside.”

I got up and placed Spike on the chair I’d just vacated. “No argument there. I’m going to go home, activate my alcohol receptors, and drown my sorrows. Then, tomorrow, back to the salt mines.”

I waved to Howard, then popped back to my own VR, in Sol system.





13. Flying Cities



Marcus

February 2215

Poseidon

“I suppose you’re all wondering why I’ve gathered you here.” I turned to sweep my gaze across the assembled invitees. I saw several eye-rolls, some smiles, and a couple of blank faces that said, ‘please let this be over soon’.

Philistines.

“Sorry, I always get a kick out of saying that. In this case, though, it’s appropriate. There’s a project I’ve been actively working on for about fifteen years now. I think you’ll be interested.” I gazed around at my audience, gauging their mood. I noted that several of them were peering back at me with at least as much interest. Very few people had seen me walking around in my android body, as yet.

I’d arranged this meeting on a remote section of the Great Northern Mat, about three miles from the population center of New Malé. Personal flyers sat, parked randomly on the thick vegetation surface. The invitees were a heterogeneous mix of security, administration, and technical people, as well as a few individuals with no credentials at all, except that I liked and trusted them. My friends, whom I’d come to think of as the inner circle, stood off to one side. They’d declared that this was my show, and they would stay out of it.

I tried to suppress a grin, then gave up and let it come. And why not? In effect, I was about to create a new nation.

“Okay, Marcus, this is getting old. Give.” That was Yoshi, a senior infrastructure engineer and one of Kal’s friends from work.

“You got it, Yoshi. Ladies and gentlemen, I give you…the flying city of Helium!”

As I said the words, I brought the city down through the clouds to hover fifty feet overhead. Well, okay, ‘city’ was a little trumped up. It would be the size of a double lot in any suburban setting. Circular, about a hundred feet in diameter, the floating platform was flat on the top side, covered with a clear fibrex dome, with a series of hemispherical protuberances arranged radially on the underside.

“I will be dipped in shit.” Yoshi’s mouth hung open. He turned toward me, eyes goggling. “Okay, I’m impressed. How’s it work? Not like the flyers…”

“No, of course not. No turbo-props. Or helium, ironically. Helium, the city, uses a series of SURGE coils.”

“But that can’t be right. Gravity is always nullified in a SURGE field. This isn’t supposed to be a free-fall city, is it?”

I laughed. “No, Yoshi. No zero-G. The field doesn’t envelop the city. The SURGE coils are set up almost like the VTOL fans on your flyers. They provide lift, nothing else. That’s those hemispheres on the underside.”

“Damn.” Yoshi’s eyebrows were starting to come together in the signature engineer frown—a sure sign that he was starting to think things through.

He turned to face me squarely. “So what you said before—this isn’t going to be offered to the colony?”

“Not quite. This won’t be offered exclusively to the colony administration. I don’t want them controlling it. They’ve already got too tight a grip on things.” I shook my head slowly. “If you’d asked any Bob, we’d have guessed it would be FAITH pulling this kind of fascist crap. Not some former island nations.”

Vinnie, despite the group’s earlier promise, muttered almost inaudibly, “They’ll try to shut it down.”

“Short of violence, Vinnie, there’s not that much they can do. Their power is mostly in perceived authority, implied threats, and social pressure.”

“So we ignore them.” Kal nodded.

“What if they do start shooting?” Gina asked. “I keep hassling you about this. Are you prepared to shoot back?”

“If it came to that,” I replied, “I still have the biggest weapons. But they know that. And they know I can take out all their space-based assets.”

Yoshi gave me the stink-eye. “Why are you doing this, Marcus?”

“You have to ask? This is supposed to be a fresh start for humanity. We’re supposed to start over, without all the former prehistoric bullshit. And instead, this government is just starting it up all over again. I want to pull their teeth.”

I turned back in the direction of Helium and waved expansively. “I’m just giving people a way to vote with their feet.”

* * *

It took no convincing at all to get everyone up to Helium for an inspection. People walked around, gazing over the edge through the clear fibrex dome material, or just pacing the perimeter.

“It’s a little short on buildings,” Kal said, smiling at me.

“I’m not really sure to what extent we need them,” I replied. “With the dome, this is completely climate-controlled. No rain, no cold, no snow. Beyond basic privacy requirements, you could just live al fresco.” I stamped my foot on the bare metal surface. “We could put down a layer of soil and have grass everywhere.”

Kal nodded. Gina cut in. “What you have here, Marcus, is a basic framework. Very nice technical proof-of-concept, but it needs a few things. Cargo bays, landing bays and garage for flyers, evacuation pods, emergency equipment, weapon emplacements, food storage, kitchens…”

“And, she’s off.” Kal laughed and inclined his head at Gina.

“Well, it is my job.”

“That’s fine, guys,” I said. “And Gina’s right. A fully usable and livable city has to have the infrastructure for people to live and do their jobs. So, I’m open to suggestions. With your help, version 2 will be move-in ready. Also bigger, of course. You need enough room for a community to work as well as live.”

Kal nodded. “And who will we invite?”

“Ah, now, there’s a whole other conversation.” I’d been waiting for someone to bring that up. “I have some notes…”

* * *

Gina grabbed a couple of beers from Kal’s fridge and returned to the couch. She handed one to Vinnie, and popped hers. Bobbing it in my direction, she said, “If you just throw it wide open, Marcus, you’re effectively inviting in Council spies.”

“Don’t care, Gina. In fact, I’m also going to file the construction plans with the appropriate government departments.”

“Just don’t expect them to issue permits.” Kal grinned at me.

I chuckled. “No, I wouldn’t expect them to move quickly on that. Anyway, the point is to make this as open as possible. No secrets, no espionage stuff. Completely out front. Everyone will know about it, everyone can get information. It pulls the teeth of the Council in a lot of ways.”

“Sabotage?”

“Wow.” I frowned at Gina. “It would have to be after the fact, when there are already citizens on board. Maybe I’m naïve, but I can’t see even the Council being willing to kill people.”

You’re right,” Gina said.

I smiled at her. “There you go.”

“You are naïve.” She smiled back.

I rolled my eyes while Vinnie and Kal chuckled. “Okay, fine,” I continued. “But if it gets to that point, it’s open war.”

“Well, here we go,” Vinnie said. “Vive la révolution.”

I sighed yet again. I wasn’t sure just exactly what it was about this that I found so mentally tiring. “I keep saying it. I’d like to avoid that entirely. Look, it’s not like we’re doing anything negative. We’re not blowing things up, or going on strike, or burning down the Bastille, or even sailing off into the west. People will continue to do their jobs, they’ll continue to produce food, perform manufacturing, whatever. They’ll just have a different mailing address.”

“What the hell is a mailing address?”

I grinned at Vinnie. “Sorry. Before your time. I meant they’ll have a different residential location. The point is, there’s no downside, not materially or economically, for the Council. Sure, we’re thumbing our noses at them, and I expect them to get grumpy, but to start shooting? Killing people?” I shook my head. “I’m not saying it’s impossible, just that it would pretty much end any credibility they might have up to that point.”

Gina, rolled her eyes. “Marcus, you’re a loner. You always have been, the way you describe it. And you’ve never sought power. But some people need power, and they need to have power over someone. Preferably lots of someones. Taking away the Council’s subjects—which is what you’d be doing—is a declaration of war.”

I grinned at her. “Ever the optimist. I love your Pollyanna view of humanity.”

“Kidding aside, Marcus, when I say war, I mean the first thing they’ll try to do is take you out. You’re not immune, or off-limits, or anything. And when the Bobs show up in a decade or two to investigate, they’ll be met with a fait accompli.”

“You’re going just a little bit overboard, aren’t you?”

She cocked her head at me. “Don’t make the common mistake of thinking your opponents are stupid just because they don’t see things your way, Marcus. They know you’re a potential threat. And they also know you’re sympathetic to the cause, if only because of…” Gina waved her hands to take in our location. “They’ll have made taking you out a priority.”

I stared at Gina, shaken. Logic said she was correct. And I was very public about my movements, about what I was doing at the moment, and so on. I realized that would have to change.

The Council had had administrative access to autofactories and printers for more than long enough now to be able to build things I didn’t know about. And I’d been encouraging it.

“Okay, Gina. You win. We’ll start taking this seriously.” I looked around at the others. “So, what’s the next step?”

“At this point, the ball is in their court,” Gina replied. “On the other hand, your end run around them with the flying cities isn’t something they can ignore. I think, as you say, the fun will come to us soon enough.”





14. Friends



Howard

May 2218

Vulcan

“This is unbelievable,” I said. “How is it that, with two hundred years of progress, men still have to wear ties?”

Bridget rolled her eyes at me as she adjusted the misbehaving article of clothing. Androids couldn’t choke—I’d checked the blueprints—but something about a suit and tie just made me feel like I was being slowly strangled.

“You, sir, are a big baby.” Bridget gave the knot a final tweak. “And despite your best efforts, you look great.”

I grinned in response. “And as a reward, you’ll let me skip—”

“Howard!”

I sighed, as theatrically as I could manage. “Yes, dear.” Humming the Volga Boatmen’s Song, I picked up my suit jacket.

Bridget said nothing, but the glare was communication enough.

* * *

The maître d’ led us to the table and pulled out a chair for Bridget. I looked around the table at the two other couples, noting the same hangdog look on the men’s faces that I was pretty sure was on mine. Some things just never changed, centuries or light-years away.

Bridget smiled and made introductions. Kumar and Reeda, Arnie and Sylvie, were friends of Bridget’s from back in her biologist days. I wondered for a moment if it was odd that I’d never met them.

Arnie gazed at me intently, his eyes narrowed. “Honestly, Howard, if I didn’t already know you’re an android, I wouldn’t ever have suspected.”

Sylvie turned to him, jaw hanging. “Arnie! For crying out loud!”

“What? Are we supposed to ignore the elephant in the room? Is this a big secret?”

I noted that Kumar was trying to suppress a grin. Reeda seemed to be unable to decide who to support. I waved a hand in dismissal and smiled at Sylvie and Arnie. “No, he’s right. I don’t think I’d be able to take an entire evening of everyone dancing around the topic. Let’s get it out of the way.”

Arnie looked smug, and Sylvie glared at him. Before that could escalate, I continued, “And you wouldn’t have known until I opened up my abdomen to get rid of my meal.”

Bridget snorted, Kumar laughed out loud, and Reeda finally came down on Sylvie’s side. Both women glared at me, then at Bridget.

“You two are made for each other,” Sylvie said.

I looked up at the ceiling. “In my case, that’s literally true.”

I sat back in satisfaction as the entire table broke up. Where are these tough crowds I keep hearing about?

Arnie, wiping a tear from one eye, said, “You don’t actually do that, do you? With the abdomen and…”

“No.” I grinned back. “But I threaten it fairly often. Bridget has stopped paying attention, so It’s nice to have some new victims.”

The comedy festival had attracted a bit of attention, but now that we were quieting down, the other tables went back to their own business.

“So how lifelike are you?” Sylvie’s face registered shock as she heard herself. “Oh, God, that came out wrong. I mean—”

“It’s okay, Sylvie, I’m not that easily offended. We’ve tried to design the androids to be as realistic as possible, both to us and to other people. Which means pain, emotional reactions, reflexes, and so on. It’s an ongoing project, of course.”

“Hmm, does that include…”

I grinned. “Ongoing project.”

Bridget rolled her eyes. “Can we order food now?”

I smiled at her and signaled the waiter.

Once he’d taken our orders, I gazed around the table. “Look, I’m human. Or at least, I was, once. I grew up in Minnesota; had sisters and parents, went to school, and so on. You wouldn’t think anything of someone with a prosthetic arm, right? Just think of me as an extreme amputation case.”

Bridget choked on her wine and went into a coughing fit. After some emergency back-patting and cleanup, I grinned at the others. “On the other hand, reflexes like that one, I can do without.”

The rest of the meal passed without significant events. We talked, we laughed, we drank. I made sure to set my alcohol consumption below anyone else. A drinking competition would be blatantly unfair, of course.

Still, Kumar put away perhaps one or two too many, with the inevitable loosening of lips. As we were sitting back, starting at our empty desert plates, he grinned at me, his head slightly off kilter. “So, any plans to take over the world? You guys could do it, couldn’t you? You have the high ground, all the weapons…”

Reeda glared at him, then drew back a clenched fist.

I held my hand up to stop her, and gave Kumar the stink eye. “Why does everyone always want to take over the world? I’ve never understood that. It sounds like a horrible job. Hell, no. We’re going to deal with the Others, but other than that you guys are on your own.”

I’d expressed the sentiment maybe a little more forcefully than intended, because eyebrows went up around the table.

“Look,” I said, trying to smooth things over. “It takes a certain type of person to want to rule. Bob wasn’t that type. None of us are. If anything, once this whole ‘Others’ thing blows over, we’re more likely to just take off. So, no, not a long-term issue.”

Kumar nodded, and the tension seemed to dissipate. But I was left with an uneasy feeling about my statement.

* * *

I pulled off the tie and tossed it onto the kitchen table. “Free, at last!”

Bridget grinned at me as she set the kettle in preparation for her end-of-day tea. “It went well. They seemed to accept you, once the initial awkwardness was taken care of.”

“Did you perhaps prime Arnie to say that?” I gave her the evil eye.

“Not as far as you know.”

I laughed. “Right. So, is there a bigger picture?”

Bridget stared at the kettle for a few moments, perhaps willing it to hurry up. “Howard, you and the other Bobs, you’re kind of like bears or mountain lions—no complex society, mostly solitary animals, very little need to interact. And unlike those animals, you’re also comfortable with each other. I’m sure having very similar attitudes about most things plays into it. But when it comes to other people, it gets more complicated.”

I had to disagree about the no complex society comment, although I had a fair idea what she actually meant by it. But how to explain moots, the rules of VR visits, and so on? I decided to let it pass.

The kettle clicked and she was silent for a moment as she poured. “What I’d really like is for you to be old news instead of a novelty. Just an extreme amputation case, like you said. People need to see you as just another person.”

“People in general?”

“And some specific people.”

“Ah.” Yeah, there’s that. “Okay, Bridget. I’ve long since learned that you’re thinking several steps ahead. I’ll go along. Just as long as I don’t have to wear the damned tie again.”

“No promises. You have to suffer, too.”

I chuckled, and sat with her as she settled down with her tea. While she sipped, I used the time to think about that last exchange with Kumar, and everything that it implied.





15. Enclaves



Riker

April 2227

Sol

I watched with satisfaction as the latest colony ships accelerated out of the Solar System. The situation had improved a little when the first wave of ships started returning from their trips, ready to take out another load. Now, between new construction and returning transports, we were starting to get some throughput.

Still not nearly enough, though. We were coming up on one million emigrants. A hundred trips down, fourteen hundred to go.

I scanned the report from Charles again. It hadn’t magically changed since the first time. Damn.

I pinged him. “Hey, Charles. Just read your report. It’s that bad?”

“Hi, Will.” Charles popped in as he answered. “Yeah, we’re having to put more and more drones into scavenging, which is taking equipment away from the construction effort. And we’ve got printers sitting idle some of the time, waiting for supplies. Right now, productivity is down about twenty percent from where it could be, and it’s going to keep getting worse.”

I swiped through the report as he talked. “No new caches of metals?”

“Naw, nothing we can find. The problem isn’t that there’s no metal left in the solar system, it’s that there are no convenient concentrations of metal left. Everything accessible was long since mined out by humanity, and the war pulverized or vaporized a lot of the cities and military equipment. Most of the planetside metal is dust. Or rust. We’ve collected all the space junk that’s easy to find—anything else is probably in weird long-period orbits. I’ve even got squads of roamers walking in lines along the ground, picking up metal scraps. We’re really down to the dregs, Will.”

I rubbed my forehead. “We’re at, what? Eighty-two ships? Maybe we reach a hundred before it gets too difficult to find any more materials. Forty years per round-trip, average. That’s two point five ships per year. So twenty five thousand people per year. Five hundred and sixty years to finish the job.”

“We’ve talked before about building colony ships at other stars, Will. It’s still an option.”

“Yeah, I know. But there’s so much ramp-up required. Plus you’d have to get a Bob to stay put to supervise. So far, not a lot of takers. Oliver over in Alpha Centauri, for instance, is concentrating on preparations for an Others’ assault. Like it or not, Sol is still the best place to build colony ships. Except for the resources issue, of course.”

“We keep going over the numbers. It doesn’t get any better with repetition. We can keep the enclaves viable for maybe another fifty to a hundred years. And that’s with every trick we’ve been able to come up with.”

“Well, really,” I said, “we can keep the enclaves going forever.”

“Sure, by going underground or into the ice. Completely subterranean existence, completely dependent on the farm donuts and hydroponics.”

“And on us, because in that position they’d have no industrial base.”

“Um. The bottom line, though, is we’d be telling most of the population that they’ll be spending the rest of their lives in a cave.” Charles sat back and stared at the ceiling.

I looked up and realized that I’d never bothered to put any detail into the ceiling in my VR. It was a flat blue with no texture. I quickly added a popcorn finish, and placed a banner that said, “My eyes are down here.”

Charles let out a surprised, barking laugh. He looked down at me, grinning. “Y’know, Will, you didn’t used to have much of a sense of humor.”

I smiled sadly back at him. “I think I’m trying to keep a bit of Homer alive.”

Charles lost his own smile and nodded. We all missed Homer.

I stared into the middle distance, focused on nothing in particular. It wasn’t just Homer. Butterworth, Julia Hendricks, and a couple of other members of our extended family had passed away in the last decade. Not people I’d particularly known, except by name, but it reminded me that, given enough time, everyone I knew would eventually be gone.

After a few moments of contemplative silence, Charles said, “We could stick everyone in stasis…”

“I’ve thought about it, Charles. Fourteen million stasis pods. That’s about thirty colony ships worth of materials. Not only would we have to stop building ships, we’d have to cannibalize a dozen of the existing ones. I don’t see the UN going for that.”

“In the long term, it would make more sense.”

“People don’t think in the long term.”

“Have you brought it up?”

I sighed. “No, and probably due to cowardice. But you’re right, they should be allowed to decide. I’ll bring it up today.”

* * *

Representative Misra’s gaze never wavered as she asked questions. One of the most level-headed of the UN delegates, she never got upset. If I could get her onside, I had a good possibility of pulling this off.

“You can build fourteen million stasis pods?”

“Yes, as I said, we’ll have to cannibalize a dozen of the returning colony ships, as well as divert all future construction.”

“How long to complete all the pods?”

“I think around fifty years, mostly due to supply issues.”

“So, many of us will die of old age, regardless. Meanwhile, no new colony ships will go out.”

“That’s true, Representative Misra, but after the first dozen, any returning ships can still take people out.”

Swarna Misra looked down at her desk for a moment, then looked back at the camera. “Here’s the problem, Mr. Johansson. Under the current system, about three hundred thousand more people will go out to colonies within our lifetimes. Under your proposed system, possibly half of the population—seven million people—will die of old age on Earth before pods are ready for them. The other half will get into pods, where they will remain for some indefinite amount of time, possibly centuries. Mathematically, your suggestion makes some sense. But emotionally, it is not attractive. At least while alive, we are masters of our destiny.”

Reaching forward, she said, “I cannot endorse this plan. Sorry.” She switched off her microphone and sat down.

Damn.

Next up was Minister MacIntyre. He had replaced Gerrold in New Zealand after the VEHEMENT situation. He was barely less hostile to me than Gerrold had been. Despite several clandestine investigations on my part, I hadn’t been able to find any connection that would warrant the antipathy. I guess I would have to accept that I would never be New Zealand’s favorite replicant.

“What assurances do we have that you’ll even wake us up?” he asked, not even bothering with any warm-up remarks.

Oh, for crying out loud. “Because if that’s how I felt, Minister, I could just leave right now with no subterfuge.”

“So you are threatening us, now?”

I rolled my eyes, and I let the cameras see it.



The session went on for several hours, and the upshot was that it would be discussed and debated more at future sessions. Meanwhile, we would continue with the current schedule.

I sighed and closed my video window. Stupid humans.





16. The Departed



Marcus

March 2215

Poseidon

An angry mob faced off against the security personnel. “You do not have a right to prevent us from leaving!” someone yelled.

The security squad stood squarely between the citizens and the parked flyers. They weren’t quite pointing their weapons at the crowd, but the threat was definitely there.

It seemed the Council had finally gotten their act together. Within minutes of my announcement that the fourth aerial city, Thark, was taking immigrants, security squads had moved in and cut people off from the flyers.

I’d been expecting them to come up with something eventually, although they seem to have figured it out a little more slowly than I’d have given them credit for. But that was okay. Time for phase 2.

Behind the crowd, opposite the security forces, a half-dozen cargo drones landed. I floated my observation drone up high enough to be seen and heard clearly, ordered the drones to open the cargo bay doors, and announced, “Buses for Thark are now loading. Please move to the back of the bus.”

Within seconds, the crowd had loaded into the cargo drones. The security personnel gritted their teeth, and several of them made as if to point their weapons. The squad leader growled an order and they desisted.

I released a breath that I hadn’t realized I’d been holding. For all my bravado, I knew I was engaged in a game of brinksmanship. If the Council decided to call my bluff, people could get hurt or killed. And that would be on me.

But we’d now loaded four cities without violence breaking out. A precedent of sorts had been established.

Very likely I’d be getting a call from Councilor Brennan any minute now.

* * *

Riker popped into my VR. “I just got an earful from the Poseidon Council. Fomenting revolution, are you?”

I bobbed my head back and forth, as I waved him to a chair. Riker sat down, accepted a coffee from Jeeves, and gazed at me silently, one eyebrow up.

“C’mon, Will, you know what they’ve been doing! Clamping down on travel, use of flyers, dictating jobs, living arrangements…”

“It’s a unique situation, Marcus. Poseidon’s got all the room you could want, but only if you’re a fish.”

I waved the comment away. “I understand the scarcity situation, but there’s no aspect of we’re all in this together. They just hand down pronouncements, and you do as told or else. And or else now includes consequences—anything from loss of privileges through house arrest all the way to incarceration. And if there’s anything dumber than jailing people when you need every single person working, I’ve never seen it.”

Will sighed. “Okay, bud. Off the record, I agree with you. And I’ve read your blog about the monitoring, which I find as galling as you do. But the official line from the Council is that you’re interfering with the development plans for the planet.”

I rolled my eyes. “Of course I’m interfering. That’s the whole point! But,” I held up a finger in a lecturing pose. “What I’m not doing is screwing up the timetable. Putting people on aerial cities spreads the population quicker, gets people off the mats quicker, ramps up the technology quicker… A planet-full of aerial cities would be the ideal situation. Come to that, we could do the same with the floating cities. But the Council is building just enough of them for industrial and commercial purposes, with residential use not even on the priority list. They don’t want people out there on dozens of different independent cities, because there’s no way to control people in that scenario.”

“I don’t know how we managed to end up with a bunch of reactionary types in charge. It sure doesn’t go with the stereotype of laidback tropical islanders. Sharma would never have allowed this to develop.”

I sighed. “Ephemerals, Will. They die.”

“Don’t let Bill hear you say that.”

“Yeah, I know.” I got up and started to pace. “Look, bottom line, I’m not doing anything in any way illegal or immoral. It’s like Howard with his distillery. It pissed off Cranston, but it was a completely reasonable business venture.” I turned to Will. “And speaking of, aren’t you one of the guys who got Cranston deposed, because you didn’t like his policies?”

Will grinned at me. “I didn’t do it, nobody saw me, and you can’t prove it anyway.”

“Whereas I’m a little more obvious about it. But it’s the same problem: how do we keep working with a government that we believe is wrong on a basic moral level?”

“Okay, Marcus. I’ve talked to you, which is what the Council asked me to do.” Will got up and gave me a quick salute. “Just don’t get anyone killed, all right?” Without waiting for a response, he popped out.

Yeah. That’s the trick, isn’t it?

Sighing, I pulled up the latest reports. Two more cities, almost ready to launch. Kal had come up with a bunch of suggestions for the next generation design, based on feedback from early residents. And Thark was full, and in full operation.

It was all looking good. But sooner or later, the Council would decide on a strategy. I couldn’t completely suppress a feeling of dread.





17. Underway



Icarus

January 2232

Interstellar space

The phrase middle of nowhere took on an entirely new meaning when you were between star systems. I sat in the middle of a sphere of empty space, with nothing more than the occasional lonely hydrogen atom for literally light-years. The Orion-Cygnus arm of the Milky Way stretched across the sky, annotated by overlays showing distances, readings, and the location of local tourist attractions. Sixty trillion miles to next gas station. I snorted at the thought.

“Status check.”

I looked up at the call from Dae. Right on time, as usual. Well, why not? I didn’t begrudge him his tics, and he didn’t tease me about my wraparound planetarium view.

I returned to my library and opened up my calculation page before responding. “Everything’s in the green.”

“Your tau is a little low.”

I glanced at the status board. “I was drawing slightly ahead of you. I had to cut back my acceleration just a tad.”

“I would have preferred if you’d extended your curve instead, Ick. We need to be synchronized.”

“Understood. Still lots of time to adjust.”

“Um. And on that subject, how are the calcs going?”

“So-so. I still can’t find a definitive answer. Of course, it’s not like anyone’s ever done this before.”

Daedalus chuckled. “Yeah, granted. Have you determined a safe minimum tau, though?”

“Sure,” I answered. “But it’s probably overkill.”

“I’m good with overkill.”

I could hear the grin in his voice. “As am I, Dae. As are all the Bobs. And we have the tau for that. Or will, by the time we get there. Which won’t be long on our clocks.” I smiled into the air. “I guess we could get ourselves into the Bobiverse Book of Records with this. Highest recorded tau by a Heaven vessel.”

“Uh huh. You thinking of heading for the galactic core?”

That got a chuckle from me. “Y’know, once we’re done—”

“—assuming this works—”

“Sure, sure. But it’s not a terrible idea, really.”

There was a moment of silence. “I was going to laugh at you, Ick. But the more I think of it… Really, what’s holding us here?”

“Homo sideria, baby. Maybe it’s time to join up.”

Daedalus popped in, holding a coffee. “Or start it up. Even Mario hasn’t really left the area. I don’t think anyone qualifies yet.”

I waved up a patio chair for Dae, his favorite seating device, and popped up a coffee for myself. “You think we’re timid as a group?”

“No, maybe just creatures of habit. And comfort zone.”

I nodded slowly, letting a grin form. “So, you up for it?”

“Hell, why not?”

I raised my cup in salute. “To Sagittarius A-Star. May it not fry us to twigs.”

Dae made a sweeping motion with his hand. “Just have to make this delivery first.”





18. Arrival at 82 Eridani



Mack

October 2220

82 Eridani

I was incredibly lucky to have been preparing to go out with a set of colony ships when 82 Eridani was secured. The vote by the colonists to change destinations was barely a formality, probably the most one-sided vote ever registered on Earth, pre or post-war.

And now, twenty-five years later, we’d arrived. Three colony ships, two from Vancouver Island and one from Japan, would be the first human beings to settle this system.

The inner of the two habitable planets resembled Venus in the old pulp-fiction novels—thick, impenetrable jungle, heavy clouds and mist, and large, hungry animals. The outer planet was cooler, with predominantly steppe climates. But it also had about seven percent heavier gravity than Earth. The second generation would adapt. The first would have sore feet for the rest of their lives.

And the larger moon of the outer planet was habitable. Marginally. It would require a serious beefing up of atmospheric pressure. But thanks to years of research and, frankly, screwing around with the environment on Ragnarök, Bill had solutions ready. We would have the atmosphere up to Earth normal within fifty years.

I checked the L4 points for each planet, looking for the materials caches that Verne’s notes said he’d left for us. Sure enough, a couple of million tons of various elements, bundled up with radio beacons attached, all ready and available for manufacturing. Awesome.

Well, time to report back. I pinged the colony ships, then invited them into my VR. Isaac, Jack, and Owen popped in. This group had no particular VR theme or style, and all three affected simple jean-and-tee-shirt ensembles. Original Bob had always been a bit button-down, so it was surprising to see the same variation in three clones at the same time. One of these years, someone would have to do a study and see if there were any patterns to the cloning variations.

“Hey, Mack,” Isaac said. “How’s it looking?”

“Well, the stuff Verne left for us is still there. The system appears to still be Medeiros-free, which is a bonus, of course.”

I arranged holograms and data sheets for the three planets in midair, then turned to the other Bobs. “We need to name the planets. The humans seem to accept suggested names from us, but leave it to them and, well, we’re still waiting on KKP.”

“I thought it was Quilt?” Jack grinned.

“It might end up as that just through common usage. But the official name is still KKP, until they can agree on something.”

Jack waved the comment away, not really interested. “Looking at the pictures, I really like Owen’s suggestion of Valhalla for the moon of planet three. Can we settle that one?”

I looked around. Everyone nodded. “Okay, Valhalla it is,” I said. “I agree, that’s a good one. Now, the primary?”

“Asgard?”

“That’s a little trite, don’t you think?” I gave Jack the evil eye.

He shrugged, unrepentant. “I like themes.”

No one but me seemed to have a problem with it, so I shrugged. “Let’s take it as tentative. Now, planet two?”

“Tartarus?”

“Oh, sure, if you don’t want anyone to settle there, ever.”

Jack grinned and shrugged again. “Well, if we want to stay on theme, there’s Muspelheim.”

“That sounds like some kind of rash,” Isaac interjected. We all laughed.

“Jotunheim?”

We all looked at Owen. “Land of giants,” I said. “Actually kind of appropriate.”

“And sticking to the theme!” Jack exclaimed.

“Okay, then, vote on those three. “In favor? Opposed?” I grinned at the guys. “Carried. Looks like we have a Norse mythology going here.”

I sat down and grabbed a Coke. “So, now that the fun stuff is out of the way, how will we handle the settling?”

“We’ll wake up a rep from each colony group, Let them decide.” Isaac waved a hand at the holograms. “There’s enough space on Asgard and Jotunheim that they could reasonably pick the same planet.”

“Hmm, jungle planet, heavy planet, or can’t-breathe planet. This should be fun.”

* * *

Katsu Ito, leader of the Japanese enclave, was a Harvard-educated intellectual who had found himself in a position of power despite all his attempts to dodge the position. Or so he explained it, anyway. At the moment, he was hugging a coffee in Exodus-43’s common area. I’d printed up one of the androids from Howard’s plans and was sitting across the table, waiting for him to focus.

He looked up at me, eyes still not quite tracking. Bobbing his head slightly, he said, “You’re not a video. But you look like Riker. What the—?”

I smiled back at him. “Android, sir. Technology marches on. I’m Mack, the replicant who was assigned to escort the colony ships to 82 Eridani.”

Christie Campbell, the Vancouver Island enclave leader, was hugging a cup of chamomile tea. I spared a moment to be perplexed. The stasis pods didn’t freeze the subject. There was no reason to be cold, or to need to warm up. But when decanted, people almost universally wanted to hug something warm. Weird.

She peered at us with one eye, evidently in somewhat worse shape than Katsu. “I think the takeaway, Ser Ito, is that we have arrived and there are some decisions to make.”

“That is correct, Ser Campbell.” I nodded to her. “I’ve prepared summaries for you to read while you hug your warm-up drinks. We can talk in an hour or so.” I nodded again, got up, and left. I could have just switched off right in front of them, but I didn’t think that shoving my artificiality in their faces would be politically astute.

* * *

I came back an hour later, to find the two colony leaders in deep discussion. They looked up as I sat down.

“Have you come to any decisions?” I asked.

“I believe we have,” Ser Campbell replied. “The Canadian contingent will settle on Asgard. Your first recommendation for a site will be acceptable.” She turned her head and nodded to Mr. Ito, conceding the floor.

He wore a tight smile as he spoke. “We will settle the second planet, and we will accept your recommendation of a more northerly location where the ecosystem is less overwhelming. However, the name…”

I raised my eyebrows.

“Jotunheim? It sounds like someone sneezing.” He shook his head. “Unacceptable. We prefer Takama-ga-hara.”

I quickly referenced my libraries. It took less than five milliseconds to find the definition. “The dwelling place of the Kami. Nice. And perhaps appropriate. However, westerners will shorten it to Takama. Just sayin’.”

He grinned. “An acceptable risk.”

“Okay, done.” I returned the smile. “Jack will be pissed. His theme is kaput.”

* * *

Jack popped into my VR, invoked a La-Z-Boy, and plopped down on it. “Aagh! Friggin’ whiney, complainy, ungrateful hoo-mahns. We hates ‘em.”

“What now?”

“Turns out the jungles of Takama stink. And not just any old stink. The kind of stink that makes you wish you were back on Earth. Oh, and the gravity of Asgard is too high. Like that’s a surprise. But apparently it’s our fault, like we adjusted the gravity meter badly. And the sun is too bright, the clouds are too dark, the bugs are too buggy, the hills are too hilly…”

“You exaggerate.”

“Possibly. A bit.” Jack sat forward and scrubbed his face with his hands. “Remind me why we’re doing this?”

“Because we’re wonderful, caring people?”

“Speak for yourself.”

I grinned at him. “Actually Jack, it brings up a point. Dexter’s been getting great results on Vulcan and Romulus by concentrating on making the inhabitants as independent as possible. Things like giving them control over the printer groups, making sure they have their own cargo ships, and so on. Maybe we should move in that direction early.”

Jack shrugged. “That’s up to you more than anyone. The three of us will be leaving as soon as we’ve finished offloading the colonists. You’re the one who has to put up with them long-term.”

“Mm. Well, one step at a time.”

* * *

Ser Campbell was not amused. Okay, note to self, no attempts at levity in the future.

“Fine, Ser Campbell. Exactly what would you like me to do about the mosquitoes?”

“Mosquitoes have nothing on these flying vampires, Mr. Johansson. It would be nice if they fell over dead after biting someone, but apparently humans are biocompatible. There must be something that can be done to control them?”

Cupid bugs on Vulcan, Ickies on KKP, and Super Vampire Power Mosquitoes here. It would appear that the universe had certain themes that it liked to re-use. Wonderful. “You understand that if we clear them, there will ecological impacts?”

“I really don’t care. I have three bites myself that are keeping me awake at night, and I can state truthfully that I would happily take a hammer to each and every one of the little…pests.”

I had to admit, of all the things I didn’t miss about being biological, mosquitoes ranked very high. “Got it. All right, Ser Campbell. I think I can adapt Howard’s Cupid killers for something a little smaller.”

Ser Campbell nodded, apparently mollified. “I don’t suppose you can do anything about the gravity?” She gave me a small smile.

“Afraid not.” I chuckled. “Contrary to popular rumor, there isn’t actually a gravity meter.”

She sighed and nodded. “Ser Ito has described the odor of Takama well enough that I wouldn’t seriously consider suggesting to my citizens that we move. However, when Valhalla becomes available, we might experience a lot of emigration.”

“Mm, yeah, 0.8 gravity would be a significant relief. But that’s maybe fifty years away. Your children may be more satisfied with the status quo.”

Ser Campbell nodded without comment. We said our goodbyes and disconnected.

I checked the archives, and quickly found Howard’s plans for the Cupid bug killers. They could be scaled down for something more the size of a wasp. I sent the plans to the printer queue with a feeling akin to relief. One more item down.





19. Cities Attacked



Marcus

September 2215

Poseidon

“They’ve done it. They’ve actually gone and done it!” Vinnie waved his phone like a weapon as he stomped toward me. Vinnie was not physically imposing, but somehow he managed to look like an unstoppable juggernaut when in his angry marching mode.

“And by it, you mean…” Kal looked up from his tablet, where he’d been working on an engineering design for a new fish harvesting system.

A dozen of us sat or reclined on the ring of grass that formed the periphery of the flying city of Amhor. Most residents who could manage it performed their daily duties on lawn chairs or even on blankets. The air circulation systems were very carefully designed to keep the air temps down around a comfortable spring day in our domed environment—and it helped that fibrex didn’t trap infrared like traditional glass.

Life was hell, but we tried to bear up under the burden.

Vinnie threw himself down on the grass and tossed his phone onto a nearby side table. “The Council has declared us deserters and forbidden any contact. They’re confiscating any assets owned by any city resident that they can get their hands on, and issued warrants for our arrest.”

This wasn’t really unexpected. In fact, it had taken a month longer than the date I’d originally estimated. If the Council had any brains at all, they’d be trying to pull the teeth of the biggest single threat to their rule—me—right about now. I checked my feeds and, sure enough, I’d been locked out of colony patrol, monitoring, defense, and infrastructure channels.

Damn. That meant I would no longer be able to spend my time monitoring things for them, fixing things for them, running things for them…boo hoo. I grinned, and Kal looked at me quizzically.

“I think I’ve just been fired.” I shrugged at him. “Spares me the trouble of quitting, I guess.”

“What are we going to do?” asked one of the planning techs, a blonde woman named Freida.

“Nothing,” I replied. “I’ve exchanged words with the Council the last couple of months. I’ve made it clear to them that we, and especially I, won’t fire the first shot. But that if they try to get their way by violence or war, they’d have the entire Bobiverse to deal with. So I don’t actually expect any shooting. Just legal maneuvering and threats.”

“And economic sanctions. They’ve cut off all trade, all contact.” Kal shrugged at me.

“What exactly are they cutting us off from, Kal?” Denu leaned back on an elbow and glared at Kal with an eyebrow arched. “We have a third of the planet’s population, but we produce half the food calories. Most of the technical people transferred to the cities in the first month. Manufacturing is off-planet, so we have as good access to it as they do—”

“That may not be entirely true,” I said. Everyone looked at me.

I shrugged. “I’ve been checking statuses as we’ve been talking. The Council seems to have managed to garrison all the materials stocks in the Lagrange points.” I tried to wave up an image, then remembered that I wasn’t in VR. Instead, I sent a feed to any tablets in our group. “I guess it explains why they were so slow to act—they were taking the extra time to get into position. My drones are showing Council security forces occupying strategic locations around the stockpiles. And,” I added, shaking my head, “looks like they’ve laid claim to the Lagrange autofactories as well.”

“Are the Bobs going to take that lying down?” Kal glared at me.

I chuckled in response. “Well, the Bobs consists of me, in this system, so not very much of a threat. I have ship busters, but they’re only useful in a full-scale engagement. I’ve got some roamers, but I wouldn’t want to sacrifice them in a guerilla war. I have my printers, but it would take time to set up a full autofactory, and more time to get mining going again.”

“So we’re dead in the water?”

“For the moment, as far as they know,” I responded. “But they also know we’ll rebuild our own resources in short order. They have to bring us to our knees before we can do so.”

“How?”

I shrugged. “Resource interdiction, which they’ve already done; denial of food sources, which they incorrectly think they can do; and cutting us off from any space assets, which I’m surprised to say they haven’t—”

At that moment, the signal from my decoy cut off. “Son of a bitch. They did it.”

All heads turned to stare at me. I shrugged and gave them a twisted grin. “They just blew me up!”





20. Life



Howard

June 2219

HIP 14101

Finally.

The drone flew through Odin’s upper-middle cloud layer, casual as you please, as if umpty-ump of its ancestors hadn’t gone down in screaming flames trying to achieve this milestone. Odin was slightly smaller than Saturn, but far more meteorologically active, due to being closer to its primary.

All of which made a difficult environment for adapting a SURGE-powered drone.

I watched readings carefully as the drone cruised through the atmosphere. While the chemistry wasn’t actually corrosive as such, it was definitely chemically active. The multiple possibilities for exothermic reactions made me hopeful that I would find something that I might be able to call life.

I had no idea if all this work would ultimately pay off, but it was certainly interesting. The view from the drone was incomparable. I could see hundreds of kilometers down through clear patches of atmosphere into the depths, where colored masses of organics formed massive floating clouds. The layering was pretty obvious—Odin’s atmosphere was heavily stratified both latitudinally and vertically.

Then I saw it—a group of dots, far ahead, seemingly flying in formation. I aimed the drone toward them. By the time I got to within a couple of kilometers, I was able to resolve the targets—giant blimps, with tentacles spread round them.

There was no question they were alive. They didn’t quite resemble zeppelins, and they didn’t quite resemble jellyfish, and they didn’t quite resemble squid. They were some weird mashup of all three. Perhaps fifty meters long, with tentacles—the exact number varied between individuals. They moved as a flock.

The flock didn’t react defensively to the drone, which was probably far too small to present as a threat. I circled them a dozen times, each individual following my trajectory with something that might have been an eye on a stalk.

The drone’s readings finally moved far enough into the red, and I had to stop and bring it back—post-mortem examinations were still a large part of my development effort, and this one had been wildly successful. As the drone flew up to my location in orbit, I played the video records again and again.

Finally, I turned off the playback and stared into space, a smile forming on my face. Bridget would love this. No biologist could possibly resist.

* * *

“But, that’s—incredible!” Bridget seemed to have become permanently bug-eyed as she scanned through the videos. “They are absolutely alive. Are they carbon-based? DNA-based?”

“Probably, and who knows?” I grinned at her from an inset window on her tablet. I hadn’t wanted to take the time to deploy Manny, so I’d just phoned.

“My God, Howard. And you have forever to study them…”

“You could, too, Bridget.”

“Howard…” Bridget gave me the stink-eye.

“Sorry Bridge. I know, I promised. It just slipped out.”

She responded with one of her patented nuclear smiles, then turned back to the videos. “I would love to see them.”

“Wish granted. I’ll be right over.”

Bridget raised an eyebrow. “Howard, you are oddly well-prepared. Am I being set up?”

I grinned and winked at her as I disconnected.

* * *

Bridget looked at the device in her hands—a light helmet-shaped frame, with embedded sensors, integrated goggles, and headphones. On the coffee table in front of her lay a pair of very techie-looking gloves.

“And what happens when I put this stuff on?” She asked, one eyebrow raised.

“Well, this was the state of the art in video game gear, just before FAITH stomped on that particular industry. Full-immersion VR, or the twenty-first-century version of it, anyway. I found the plans in the libraries, and printed this up.”

“And what happens when I put this stuff on?” Bridget repeated.

“You get to visit me at my place. And get a better look at the Odin wildlife.”

She nodded, slipped on the gloves, and donned the helmet.

And popped into my VR.

I put Manny on standby and returned to VR. I was sitting in my beach chair, grinning at her as she slowly turned to take in the scene. I’d made Bridget’s avatar from images taken when I first met her, and it was an almost physical jolt to see her standing there, young again.

I stood up and walked over. “This is a very limited interface, of course. You can’t fully interact—although you can pick up objects or feel me holding your hands—” I took her hands in mine. “—and you can move around using the game interface.”

“All right. So, show me.”

I activated the videos and data files that I’d accumulated on the native Odin life. Bridget gasped and stared at the images. She walked over to them and began paging and swiping through the data. I felt a moment of pleasure that our user interface was so obviously intuitive. But, of course, the Bobs had been living it and tweaking it for around a hundred years, now.

“I’ve been cataloguing things,” I said. “There’s an incredibly diverse ecosystem. It has plant-equivalents that build organics from sunlight and raw materials; and animals, which eat plants or other animals.”

Bridget took a moment to smile at me, then went back to the videos and files. She muttered constantly, a specialist immersed in her chosen field.

I sat down and watched her work, a glow of joy battling with a vaguely guilty feeling. This wasn’t really about the Odin native life. I could have emailed those files to her. I’d promised Bridget that I wouldn’t hassle her about replication. Well, I was as capable of lawyering as the next person. I couldn’t say anything, but non-verbal persuasions were fair game.

Eventually, Bridget noticed her hands. She stopped, examined them closely. Then she grabbed a handful of her hair and pulled it into view. She turned to me with a hurt look. “Howard, really? This is a dirty trick.”

“Hey, fair’s fair. I’m perpetually thirty-one in here. And that is how I see you. Always will. I’m not trying to be underhanded.”

“You are an evil, evil man. And a lawyer.” Her tone was disapproving, but she couldn’t suppress a small smile.

“But you repeat yourself…”

Bridget laughed, then gestured around her. “And the tropical beach thing is totally coincidental as well, right?”

“Hey, I have to have something. You should see Marvin’s VRs. Now there’s a man with too much time on his hands.”

Bridget gazed at me with an expression that I had trouble categorizing. Amusement? Longing? Affection? At least the hurt look was gone.

“You have a nice world here, Howard. But when I go back to the other one, I’ve still got gray hair.” She waved at the videos. “Those could have been displayed on my wall monitor. I understand your arguments, but this isn’t something I want.” She reached up to her head, and disappeared from VR.

I quickly activated Manny. I ‘woke up’ in Bridget’s living room, standing at parade rest. Bridget was just removing the gloves.

Before I could begin apologizing, she came over and put her arms around me and rested her head on my shoulder. I wrapped her in a hug, and everything else stopped mattering.





21. The Return



Bill

June 2223

82 Eridani

I was visiting Mack at 82 Eridani. I tried to stay on top of things at the different sites, and to be honest, I needed a break. The Others had just finished ‘harvesting’ the Pav homeworld, and several years of observing their technique hadn’t blunted the emotional turmoil.

I sat in one of Mack’s lawn chairs, blowing on a coffee to cool it down. Turned out Mack liked the ritual involved in cooling the coffee until it was drinkable. I could have just adjusted it, but that would be rude.

Mack took a sip of his own coffee, then continued his report. “Things are looking good. The Canadian colony on Asgard is doing well—much better, now, actually, since the vampire mosquitoes are being brought under control.”

“Super Vampire Power Mosquitoes,” I corrected.

“Mutant Super Vampire Power Mosquitoes,” he quipped. “Honestly, Bill, Original Bob would have run screaming from the place. You remember how our skin reacted to even itty-bitty mosquito bites?”

“Yup. Fine, Nordic skin.” I grinned at him. “Why do you think I haven’t asked for pictures?”

Mack nodded, still grinning. “Anyway, the mosquito killers are one of the more popular pieces of automation in New Vancouver. I just have to say ‘mosquito killers’ and I can get anything approved on the printer schedule.”

“And speaking of inconveniences, how is the Japanese colony doing with their unique problem?”

Mack laughed. “You are, of course, carefully not referring to the elephant in the room? The very stinky elephant?” He waggled his eyebrows. “Or maybe it’s just what the elephant left behind?”

“Yeah, that one,” I said, chuckling. “Seriously, they can’t get used to it?”

“It’s seasonal, Bill, and affected by wind and weather. It turns out to be a common plant in the ubiquitous swamps. Sort of a local version of skunk cabbage, but much more potent.”

“And what are they going to do about it?”

“Nuking has been suggested,” Mack said, deadpan.

“Seriously?”

“I don’t think they were serious, Bill, but it was brought up. I checked it out with the android, once, to see for myself, figuratively speaking. Lemme tell you, it’s bad. I disabled olfactory input after that.”

“So, on a more realistic note, what can they do?”

He shrugged. “Draining the swamps, developing something to kill off the plants, breed a less smelly version of the plants that will outcompete the wild version…and nuking.”

I shook my head. “Don’t get involved. Just…don’t.”

“Works for me.” Mack grinned back. “Anyway, I’m too busy with the space-based industry. Verne collected a lot of raw materials into the Lagrange points, but between two large colonies and all the equipment on Valhalla for the terraforming…” He shrugged. “Yeah, I’m going through it pretty fast. I’ve got drones and roamers flying around the system, looking for more—”

Right in the middle of Mack’s sentence, I found myself back in my own VR. “Guppy, what happened?”

[Interface with other vessel was terminated abruptly. No shutdown handshake.]

What the hell?

I attempted to ping Mack, but got nothing. “Guppy, try every option you have. Try to get any comms going at all with Mack or anything in the area.”

[Aye.]

I waited for several intolerable milliseconds. What could have taken Mack out like that? Or was it just a communications issue of some kind?

[SCUT Link relay has been acquired to several onboard roamers. Vessel is heavily damaged, replicant is offline.]

“What? Give me a connection to one of them.”

Guppy handed me a connection and I entered the roamer.

I stared, shocked, at a view of empty space through a huge rent in the side of Mack’s vessel. Shards of metal and pieces of equipment floated around and caromed off of walls and other flotsam.

What the hell caused this?

I thought immediately of the Others. Could they have sent an expedition here to learn more about us? No, that didn’t make sense. They didn’t know about this system.

Then, movement. An outline shifted against the starry backdrop. I ran image analysis against several frames from the roamer’s video, and was able to extract a silhouette.

Medeiros.

The bastard must have coasted up to Mack’s location and hit him with a missile from short range.

There was no time to deal with the rage, though. I left the roamer for a moment, jacked myself up to maximum frame-rate, and pondered the situation.

Two milliseconds later, I returned to normal time, and sent an all-Bobs text at high priority. Medeiros in 82 Eridani. Mack taken out. Need Bobs to locate and connect with all available AMIs. Coordinate with my Guppy.

“Guppy, inspect and inventory. Get me a report on the state of Mack’s vessel.”

[Aye]

Without waiting for a response, I returned to my roamer. Medeiros’ exact plans were unknown, but there were several possibilities, all of which had to be blocked.

Several texts came in from Other Bobs who had connected with other roamers on board or out by the autofactories. I began giving orders.

Bobs on board: protect replicant matrix, sequester or destroy any SCUT, SUDDAR or weapon tech. Check reactor for possibility of self-destruct. If anyone can get a roamer onto Medeiros’ ship, do so. We need him tagged.

Bobs at autofactories: Gather and inventory printers. We have to be prepared to keep them out of his hands.

Any other Bobs, check in.

I returned my attention to the Brazilian craft, which was edging up to Mack’s ship. At that moment, Medeiros performed a SUDDAR scan on us. I froze, as did every roamer on board. No sense showing him what was still active. The scan lasted less than a second, and the Brazilian kept edging in. The safest thing would have been for him to blow us up. Either he was hoarding his missiles, or he wanted the Heaven vessel as intact as possible.

A text from Thor came in. Mack’s cube is intact.

The image that Thor had sent with the text left no doubt. Mack’s cube had escaped the zone of destruction. That was both good and bad. Good, because we hadn’t permanently lost a Bob. Bad because it was one of the items that Medeiros might be going for. A cube could be put up on a cradle and either infected with something, as Homer had been, or even tortured.

Thor, get the cube out of here. Just jump. If it looks like you’ll be captured, destroy it.

Thor responded immediately. Ten four.

Who’s got eyes on the reactor? I asked.

Oliver responded. It’s toast. No possibility of a self-destruct.

Damn. That meant this would have to be done the hard way. It also meant we were running on power cells. At some point, the SCUT transceiver would give out, and that would be it for our access to 82 Eridani.

I didn’t have time to ponder the alternatives. Okay, guys. Disassemble all tech, start flinging pieces. Nothing survives. Oliver, can you gather the SCUT and a few power cells?

Will do.

Movement from the Brazilian attracted my attention. The cargo doors opened, and a number of roamers jumped in the direction of Mack’s ship.

I sent a general alert. Prepare to repel boarders.

In moments, a half-dozen roamers joined me at the rent in Mack’s hull.

There were twice as many of them, so I had no real illusions about winning the battle. Our roamers had no particular advantage in this situation. The best we could do was to hold them off until the sabotage crew could get it done.

The enemy roamers came straight in, no finesse, no feints. And why shouldn’t they? Straight numerical advantage was a strategy all its own.

The battle lasted almost two minutes. Roamers are very tough devices—they’re specifically designed to be able to operate with up to half their legs missing. The plasma cutters were the weapon of choice on both sides. The battle resembled, no kidding, one of those old Errol Flynn swordfight melee scenes, as long as you imagined giant spiders instead of actors in tights. Roamers parried and riposted all over the cargo bay, the occasional errant leg floating through the mix.

Finally, though, they took us out. The last roamer, crewed by Jacques, put up a great fight, wedged into the axial corridor so that no one could get by. But an attack from two opponents at once took out his cutter limb, and that was it. In moments, he was scrap.

How did we do? I group-texted. The situation was far too volatile for any kind of VR meetup, and in fact, I imagined everyone had given up VR for the duration.

Mack is well out of here. Two roamers in attendance, Thor responded. We’ll slice and dice if necessary.

All remaining onboard SUDDAR and SCUT tech is toothpicks, someone else added.

Except for the transceiver, Oliver said. And I’ll destroy that if it looks like it’ll be taken.

I thought for a moment. Okay guys, let’s do as much damage to this asshole as possible. Let him have the hulk; instead, let’s go for his vessel.

There were acknowledgements, and I watched from a piggyback feed as the five surviving roamers still on-board leaped across space toward the Brazilian.

Unfortunately, Medeiros was ready for us. A half-dozen roamers leaped out of his hold to intercept. Another cutter-fight ensued, this one in free-fall between the ships. Roamers had small compressed-air nozzles for free-fall maneuvering, but those wouldn’t last long. Our roamers attempted to get feet on metal as quickly as possible, with the opponents attempting to block us or toss us off.

Less than a minute later, we found to our surprise that we’d won the fight. Two of our roamers still survived, one only barely. But on a last man standing basis, it was enough.

Medeiros apparently thought so as well, because his ship backed rapidly away from the area before we could land on his hull. I had a pretty good idea what was coming. A few seconds later, my suspicions were confirmed, as a missile appeared from the distance.

Looks like we’re done, guys.

The missile arrived, and once again, I was back in my VR.

“Guppy, what do we have?”

[Replicant matrix is on a ballistic trajectory with two roamers attending. Four drones with SCUT comms have been located, attending the autofactories. One is on the way to retrieve the matrix. HIC71683-8 is in control. Eight more groups in the outer system are several days away at full acceleration.]

I smiled despite myself at Guppy’s response. For some reason, Guppy refused to identify any Bob by name. It was their serial number or nothing. I kept promising myself I’d look into it, someday, but I knew I wouldn’t.

This particular replicant, Isaac, was one of Bart’s early clones, senior even to Oliver. He had connected with one of the attendant drones and was racing to pick up Mack’s matrix, along with the two roamers.

Okay, everyone. I broadcast. Emergency moot in the pub. Video attendance for those of you currently controlling devices.

I popped over to the Moot VR and configured the pub. Within moments, a half-dozen video images and a dozen more Bobs had popped in.

I looked around, doing a quick evaluation from metadata. “Thanks for your quick response, guys. So, here’s what we have: a Brazilian vessel seems to have managed to sneak into 82 Eridani and take out Mack. Unfortunately, he’s the only Bob in-system, and he didn’t have any clones going.”

“Where’s he from, d’you think?” asked Oliver.

I shook my head. “I couldn’t get a good enough look—”

“I did,” Loki interjected. “I was in the group fighting out between the ships, and I got a better angle on the vessel. It’s the one from Alpha Centauri. Definitely a different series from the Medeiri that we took down in 82 Eridani.”

“Well, that’s interesting.” I rubbed my chin. “Is Calvin or Goku here?” I looked around for a moment, but no joy. “I guess not. Anyway, I remember that they were pretty sure the Medeiros they chased out of Alpha Centauri wasn’t complete.”

“Didn’t have his autofactory tech loaded, yet,” Oliver added.

“Right, which makes his strategy pretty obvious. Take out the resident Bob, then take over the autofactories.” I thought for a moment. “Can we protect the autofactories?”

“Not a chance.” Loki shrugged. “Four—well, three for now—drones and some miscellaneous roamers and mining equipment? Not much to work with. Mack had everything geared for a developing colony. He wasn’t even working on a cohort.”

“Should we just destroy them?” asked Isaac.

“I’d prefer not to. Otherwise they are dead in the water until another Bob gets there. And who is closest, anyway?”

I looked up in thought. “Hank’s at P Eridani, a little under eleven light years; Tau Ceti and Vulcan are about twelve; and of course Epsilon Eridani at twelve point five. At least a decade for any help, no matter how you look at it.”

“That’s way too long to have a Brazilian wandering around the system, making nasty.”

“But what’s he going to do?” Loki looked around, palms up in an imploring gesture. “He can’t make more of him, he can’t make movers to drop rocks on our colonies, he can’t make weapons…”

“I don’t want to find out,” I replied. “Maybe he has a printer in his cargo hold. Maybe he gets hold of one of ours. Maybe he has plenty, and he just wanted to get rid of Mack, and I’m wrong about the other stuff.”

“Well, that’s the interesting thing,” Isaac said. “The missile that finally took out Mack’s ship wasn’t military grade, not by a long shot. And if the first missile had been military grade, there wouldn’t have been anything left in the first place. I think Medeiros has, or had, some kind of factory set up somewhere, and made some home-brew explosive systems.”

I nodded in thought. “We keep dismissing him as not an engineer, but that’s probably facile. Brazil would have uploaded a lot of military knowledge, and improvising explosives is not a huge leap. He could have produced something like busters, but with a payload at the front end. It wouldn’t have to be terrifically efficient.”

“So we can’t say how many missiles or whatever that he has onboard.” Isaac rubbed his chin. “Although he’d have to go back to his factory to restock, assuming it’s in-system.”

“My feeling is that it’s not. Calvin and Goku took out Alpha Centauri back in 2163. That’s sixty years ago. It’s only nineteen lightyears from 82 Eridani, so where’s he been all this time? In-system, skulking around?”

“Nope,” Loki replied. “We took 82 Eridani in 2195. He’d have been here by then, and we did a thorough scan of the system.”

I sighed, and rubbed my forehead. “Okay, so it’s likely that he stopped at some other system for a couple of decades and built up some manufacturing capability. Probably not a lot, or he’d have proper missiles. He loaded up, then continued to here, which presumably he knew was a target system for Brazil.”

“That still doesn’t sound quite right, Bill.”

“I agree, Isaac. But there’s only so much we can deduce from what we know, and we’re probably over the line into speculation, now.” I looked around. “Who’s controlling the roamers that are with Mack?”

“Well, no one, now,” Oliver replied. “As soon as Medeiros blew up Mack’s vessel, we lost SCUT comms. Any surviving roamers will be operating autonomously on the last orders we gave them.”

“Can we link up to roamers through drone SCUT?” Loki asked.

“Sure,” Will responded. “We’ve been doing it for years in Sol, when dealing with things in the outer system. It’s too much trouble to set up a separate comms station.”

I turned to Will and grinned. “Glad to have you here. How much of this did you catch?” He hadn’t been here when we started, so I knew he was late to the party.

Will nodded to me. “I jacked and played back the session recording. I’m up to date.” Turning to Loki, he said, “It’s just a small software patch. I’ll post it for you.”

Loki nodded. “So, we have four drones, which means we have four loci of control in the system. Not that we have that much to control. The stuff in the outer system will take longer to get back, and I’m not sure if we should be bringing them in-system unless we have a plan.”

Oliver cut in. “Guys, I calculate that we have at most three hours before Medeiros gets to the nearest Lagrange factory. Can we deal with the printers first?”

There was silence all around, and I nodded. “Okay, separate the printers from the print heads. Send each item off in a separate trajectory, to eventually end up at one or the other colony. No beacons, we’ll have to find them by dead-reckoning, so make sure you have the orbital parameters carefully recorded.” I looked around at all the other Bobs. “Do we have anything explosive?”

I got several head shakes by way of response.

“We don’t like explodey stuff,” Oliver said.

“Yeah, and look where that’s gotten us.”

Will waved a hand to get us back on track. “Is there anything else we can do?”

I thought for a moment. “We’ll have to advise the colonies. We can also get an inventory from them of anything they have in the way of automation. They may have explosives, maybe even some small printers. Someone needs to go over Mack’s blog with a fine-tooth comb, looking for anything at all that might be useful. Let’s get started on all of that, then we’ll regroup and see what we’ve come up with.”

There were nods, and Bobs started popping out to work on their assigned tasks.

I sat back and rubbed my forehead. Like the Others weren’t enough of a headache.

Outstanding.





22. Derelict



Herschel

March 2227

Kuiper belt, Delta Pavonis

Neil and I moved slowly between the drifting hulks, SURGE drives on lowest power. The two Others’ cargo vessels loomed huge around us. Ten kilometers in length and a kilometer in diameter, they felt more like planetoids than something constructed by intelligent beings.

They even came with their own debris field. The derelicts had taken some pretty severe hits from the looks of it. Pieces of cargo vessel drifted lazily in complicated orbits around the two ships. The effect was eerie, like floating through an underwater graveyard.

I messaged Neil. “I’m not picking up anything. You?”

“Nope. Temps are down around thermal equilibrium. These things haven’t done anything but drift in a long time.”

“I’ve been going over the video record from the battle, and I think I’ve identified these units. They were taken out in the second attack wave.” I thought for a moment. “Radioactivity shouldn’t be an issue. Although the insides might be pretty trashed.”

“Oh?”

“We were targeting essential systems. I think the attacks will have taken out power cores, and you know how that always ends up…”

“Yeah. Kablooie.”

We separated and completed individual circumnavigations of the wrecks. No surprises. By unspoken agreement, we deployed drones carrying squads of roamers. The drones had orders to do close-up scans, while the roamers would offload and poke around anything interesting.

Finding a way in wasn’t really a problem. One of the hulks had been almost cut in two. The two halves were more disconnected than connected—only in free fall could such a small ribbon of metal hold together such massive segments.

The second hulk was in much better shape. A hole literally big enough to drive a battleship into, on a ship this size, barely qualified as a ding. But it’s not the size of the damage, it’s the quality. We must have taken out something critical.

The ships had been drifting for ten years now. We didn’t really expect any kind of activity. But we’d learned caution from previous encounters with the Others, and from a generation of B-movies.

The opportunity to examine the interior of an Others’ cargo vessel was too tempting to pass up, of course. We spent several hours, real-time, planning for every contingency we could think of. Then, leaving a couple of drones on look-out, we cautiously entered the cargo vessel through the rent in its side.

Right away, things got complicated. The ship wasn’t, it turned out, just a big cavern. We found ourselves in a large bay or hold or something, forming a pie-shaped section of the interior. That might have been the end of the exploration, except that whatever had taken out the cargo vessel had apparently continued right through the ship, taking out a lot of equipment in the process.

At the other end of the cavernous space, we exited into what appeared to be a central corridor. About a hundred meters in diameter, it extended from one end of the ship to the other. This certainly explained the large armored doors at either end of the cargo vessels.

“This thing is mostly intact,” Neil said in a near-whisper. “You don’t think it could still activate, do you?”

“You saw the equipment back there, Neil.” I noticed I was whispering as well, but I couldn’t help it. This had the feel of exploring a haunted castle. “Not sure what we took out exactly, but it must have been critical.”

“Can I have that in writing?”

“Sure, no problem. Bend over, and I’ll get my felt pen.”

“Oh, hah hah. If we get eaten by ants, you’ll look pretty stupid.”

“Well, that’s why we agreed not to do any SUDDAR sweeps. You were listening, right?”

Neil snorted but didn’t respond directly. “I’ll head that way, toward the end with the reinforced ring.”

“No prob. Be careful.”

We drifted off in opposite directions, doing a visual-only inspection.



It took less than a day to reach the ends of the ship. I received a call from Neil. “Hey, uh, Herschel…”

“Umm?”

“I’m looking at this huge thingamajig, and I think it’s the power core.”

“Wait, you mean in one piece? And what are you doing in one of the bays?”

“It was open. I went in. Sue me.”

I sighed. I’d have done the same. “So, what did the attack take out, if that’s the power core?”

“Maybe a fluke shot through the A.l. or something. But this is definitely the power core. The size of the conduits kind of gives it away.”

“Fusion reaction shut down gracefully?”

There was a moment of silence. “Well, that’s the thing. I don’t think this is a fusion reactor.”

Suddenly, this was more than just a scavenging mission. “Have you found any indications of ants?”

Neil responded in the negative. I took a moment to double-check my train of thought, then said, “Okay, we can’t put that off any more. We have to know if we’re going to have a problem, so let’s move all our equipment out of the hulks. We’ll do a low-power SUDDAR sweep to see if we activate any ants. Once we’re sure it’s clean, let’s take a couple of high-resolution scans of this mystery equipment, and see if we can figure it out.”

“Affirmative.” Telltales showed Neil’s devices vacating the hulks. I ordered mine out as well.

Within an hour, we had our scans. But no answers. Not really.

Neil popped over so we could review the results. I gestured at a hologram that slowly rotated in the air.

“Well, you’re right. It’s not fusion-based. But it’s definitely the power-generation facility.” I looked at Neil and grinned. “We may have just found some new tech!”

“Cool,” Neil replied. “We should call Bill, I guess.”

“Are you kidding me? Just hand it over, and let someone else get all the glory? No friggin’ way.”

“Aw, jeez, Hersch, I’m getting that bad-idea feeling again.”

“Again? You’re usually the source.”

“Me? Since when?”

I grinned, but didn’t bother to reply. The traditional exchange, as always, made us both feel better. But Neil wasn’t necessarily wrong. I hoped I hadn’t just taken the first steps toward kissing my ass goodbye.





23. Death



Howard

May 2220

Omicron2 Eridani

It was the call I’d been dreading for decades. Dr. Onagi looked out the video window at me. I could see from the background that he was calling from the hospital.

“There was no warning, Howard. She simply collapsed. We got her admitted, but our efforts were insufficient.”

I felt my eyes begin to sting, and choked it back ruthlessly. “I appreciate the call, Dr. Onagi, but I’m a little perplexed that it’s you calling me. Shouldn’t her children be doing this?” Well, Howie, maybe. I doubted Rosie would be dialing me up.

Dr. Onagi looked to the side for a moment. “Uh, well, they very likely would have by now. But per Mrs. Brodeur’s instructions, we placed her body in stasis immediately post-mortem. Her children were livid, and are seeking legal counsel, as far as I know. I got the impression that you figure prominently in that. They may not be talking to you at all.”

I stared, stunned. Bridget hadn’t given me any indication that she’d changed her mind. I thanked Dr. Onagi for the information and ended the call. I immediately phoned Ms. Benning.

“Good afternoon, Mr. Johansson. I’ve just heard about Mrs. Brodeur. I’m so sorry for your loss.”

“She’s been placed in stasis. Dr. Onagi says that was per her instructions. Has something happened?”

“She changed her will a few months ago. Normally, I wouldn’t be able to discuss this with you, but she specifically instructed me to read you in.” Ms. Benning reached off-screen for a moment. “And, according to eBar, her children have just filed an injunction to force the hospital to remove her body from stasis. This is not unexpected, and we already have countervailing filings in place. There will be a hearing, for which you should make yourself available. I’ll keep you informed.”

We exchanged a few more bits of information, then she disconnected. I sat back in my beach chair, staring into space. Bridget was dead. I should be a useless puddle on the floor. I had no doubt that I would be soon, but the unexpected news about her turnaround on the replication issue had thrown me for a loop.

Well, I could make myself useful while I was still in one piece. I’d built scanning equipment from the information Riker and I had gleaned. Time for an inspection.



* * *

The hearing was relatively informal, held in the judge’s office rather than the courtroom. Howie, Rosie, and Lianne sat to one side of the room, and Ms. Benning and I at the other. Dr. Onagi, representing the hospital, sat in a more neutral central position.

Judge Ulrich Katz silently scanned the documents in front of him for a few more moments, then looked up. “Issues with the last wishes of decedents are always difficult, when surviving loved ones—”

“He’s not a loved one!” Rosie interjected. The judge stared at her silently, and Lianne put a hand on her arm.

Order being restored, the judge continued, “...when surviving loved ones disagree about the specifics. But this court cannot make assumptions about the decision in advance of the actual trial. Decanting the decedent at this time will effectively give the decision to the plaintiffs, regardless of the outcome; whereas if the decedent is left in stasis, she can still be decanted should the decision go that way. And conversely, allowing scanning before a decision is rendered cannot be reversed. Therefore, I will not grant the injunction to have the body decanted immediately. Dr. Onagi, you will maintain the body in its current state, and you will not allow any other operations to be performed on it, until otherwise ordered by this court.”

The judge didn’t bang a gavel. I’d been half expecting it. Of course, my experience with court was a hundred years out of date, from the wrong continent, on a different planet, and came mostly from TV anyway.

I stood up, and looked over at Bridget’s children. The girls were rigid with the effort of not looking my way. Bridget’s son, Howie, glanced at me, and shook his head minutely. I took the hint.

We let them exit first, then followed. I looked at Ms. Benning and raised an eyebrow. She opened her mouth to answer, did a small double-take, and smiled.

“Mr. Johansson, I’ve known intellectually for some time that you are walking around in an artificial body. After all, it’s not only germane to this case, but has also been the subject of much gossip. Especially the nature of your, er, relationship with Mrs. Brodeur.” Ms. Benning blushed slightly. “But I’ve just now consciously realized that I’m not talking to a live, biological human being. I’m impressed at the verisimilitude.”

I smiled sadly. “Thank you, Ms. Benning. We Bobs have been putting a lot of effort into getting the androids as believable as possible. And to answer the not-quite-unspoken question, there’s no sexual component to my relationship with Mrs. Brodeur. I could have engineered the capability, but I didn’t. I am deeply in love with her, and she loves, or loved, me in a much less intense but still very real way.”

Ms. Benning nodded. “I have no doubt of your essential humanity, Mr. Johansson. I dealt with you over the transfer of title for the business, remember? Your emotional turmoil was obvious, and very real.”

We walked in silence for a few moments, before she continued, “While it will be an uphill battle for the plaintiffs, it’s not a slam-dunk by any means for us. But Mrs. Brodeur expected push-back from her children and made some arrangements in advance, including setting up a defense fund that the children wouldn’t be able to block.”

I nodded silently. Bridget had always been a careful, methodical thinker. Went with the career choice, I guess. She’d have covered all the bases.

None of which made things any easier. I had Bridget’s permission to replicate her, but I would have to wait for the wheels of justice to slowly grind their way to a conclusion.





24. Explorations



Herschel

April 2227

Kuiper belt, Delta Pavonis

Ants must feel like this.

The Others’ carrier, which we’d named Hulk-1, was massive. A ten-kilometer-long cylinder, one kilometer in diameter, it dwarfed even our Version-5 Heaven hulls. At the moment, I was slowly drifting down the central access shaft, while roamers painted numbers on each cargo door. I wasn’t just being anal—we’d discovered that we needed to refer to specific locations by something more helpful than grunting and pointing.

SUDDAR scans had revealed a lot of details about the ship and its contents, but sooner or later we would have to try powering it up. Those massive cargo segment doors wouldn’t be opening manually, never mind the one-hundred-meter-diameter hatches at each end.

“How’s it going, Herschel?”

“Fine,” I replied. “Almost done. 864 cargo bays. That number mean anything to you?”

There was a moment of silence before Neil replied, “It’s 600 base 12. And, come to think of it, the Others image that Bill retrieved had six feeding fingers on each side of its maw.”

I grinned. “Coincidence? I think not.”

“Nope. There’s another universal, I think. Your number base will depend on your number of digits. The Pav were base 10.”

“Are base 10, Neil. They’re not all gone.”

There was a sigh. ‘Yeah…”

Well, there was a mood killer. “Anyway,” I said, perhaps too brightly, “As soon as I’m done here, we can get onto the job of figuring out the power system. I’m anxious to see what some of the stuff in those bays actually is.”

“As long as we don’t activate some of the stuff in the process.”

“Yeah, I hear ya. Maybe we’ll have a nuke in place, just in case we need to terminate with prejudice.”

“I have a concern about that, Herschel. I’d rather avoid any action that results in destroying Hulk-1.”

“Well, um…hold on.” I took a moment to load my roamers and the attendant drones, and admire the last numbered bay: 864. “I don’t see how we can do this without some risk, buddy.”

“How about we cut into one of the bays?”

Well, that was certainly an option. The bay partitions were stupid thick, but we weren’t on a schedule.

“Okay. Let’s do that.”

* * *

We cut into bay #1, simply because SUDDAR scans showed a lot of unidentifiable stuff in it. The roamers had to cut trenches in the wall, and keep widening them. But eventually, they were able to pull a plug of metal away from the surrounding wall.

We left it floating in the central corridor, and sent in a half-dozen roamers.

It looked like this carrier hadn’t disgorged all its fighting units before we’d taken it out. The bay contained several dozen drones, each slightly bigger than a Heaven-1 vessel. They were in cradles, with umbilicals connecting them to the ship. Probably control and power feeds. Of course, there was no power, and we’d taken out the ship AI, so no control.

Neil poked a finger at a close-up image of an umbilical connection. “If we unhook that, do you think the drone will come to life?”

“Don’t know, Neil.” I rubbed my forehead—a delaying tactic, and we both knew it. “Ultimately, do we really have an alternative?”

Neil stared at the video window for a full two seconds, before turning to me. “Okay, how about this—take one apart, piece by piece. Analyze as we go. Eventually, we should be able to figure out what their readiness state is.”

“That is the least-bad idea I’ve ever heard.” I grinned back at him. “Let’s do it.”

* * *

It took more than a week to strip the drone down, piece by piece. In the end, we were forced to conclude that activation was probably done from the carrier AI’s end, not at the drone’s end. In any case, the one we’d disassembled had been inert. No power, and no way to power up without power.

Just the same, paranoia was the watchword. We picked a random drone, and placed roamers inside it, ready to begin breaking things if the drone got uppity.

“Ready?” I said to Neil.

“Ready!” he replied.

Neil was in charge of destruction, and I was in charge of unplugging. Without giving myself any more opportunity for second-guessing, I instructed the roamer to eject the umbilical from the drone.

We waited…5 seconds…10 seconds…

“Enough of this,” Neil grumbled. “It’s scanning time.” Matching actions to words, he instructed one of our drones to give the subject a good once-over.

The scan came up in my holotank within milliseconds.

“Nothing. Inert.” I looked at Neil. “Satisfied?”

“Me? Since when am I the bad guy?”

“Since always. I’m always reassuring you.”

“Oh, bite me. You are so full of it.” Neil shook his head in sorrow. “So, next question. Do we cut into every cargo bay with something in it and start unhooking stuff?”

“That’ll take years. What’s our alternative?”

“I’m starting to like the nuke idea.” Neil gave me a crooked grin.

“Okay,” I replied. “We’re going to have to trace all the wiring, to find out if we can leave the bays unpowered if we start up the reactor. And, sorry to say, we’re also going to have to place a nuke in here in case we wake something up that we shouldn’t have. Let’s just hope it doesn’t come to that.”

Neil sighed. “This is beginning to sound too much like real work.”

* * *

‘Real work’ described it very well. Some of the Others’ design decisions were, well, suboptimal. At least as far as we could tell. In several cases, power conduits split, went around a large patch of nothing in particular, then reconnected on the far side. We scanned the section of nothing twice, but found, um, nothing.

“Well, look,” Neil mused. “Sometimes, when you’re designing something, you make allowances for future expansion. As long as you have a good idea what the requirements will be, you can allow for it.”

“So it’s an expansion slot.”

“Yeah, thanks, Captain Sarcasm. Still, you’re probably not far wrong.”

“That’s wonderful, Neil. But are we any closer to being able to activate this flying island nation?”

“Let’s have a look, Hersch.” With that, Neil pulled up our working schematic. He quickly updated it with this latest information, then directed the simulation to power up.

We watched the simulation as telltales indicated virtual sections that were receiving power.

Eventually the simulation ended with the hulk in a stable state, and no issues that we could see. Neil and I looked at each other, smiled, and said in unison, “We’re good to go!”





25. Battle



Bill

June 2223

82 Eridani

Premier Campbell put her face in her hands and was silent for several seconds. President Ito attempted to remain stoic, but I could see that he was shaken.

Campbell looked up. “Mack? He’s…gone?”

“No, ma’am,” I replied. “We have his matrix. Or at least, it’s still in one piece and we know where it is. But he’s offline, for the moment. We’re trying to get it to a colony site for safekeeping.”

Campbell nodded, looking relieved.

“And how can we help, Mr. Johansson?”

I turned to President Ito’s video image. “We’re trying to inventory all our assets in this system. Anything that can be used as a weapon, anything that can be remote controlled, anything SCUT-enabled, anything that can get out of atmosphere…”

“How do the androids work? I believe there’s one at each colony site.”

I brightened. “Those are SCUT-controlled, so yes, we can use those. That’s one more, well, two more control loci for us. As soon as we can, we’ll send a couple of drones to pick them up. We can use them to relay orders to the non-SCUT mining drones.” I thought for a moment. “Plus, they’ll be useful to supplement the roamers for manipulation.”

Ito nodded, and silence descended.

Campbell finally broke the pause. “We are at war, essentially, right? Are the colonies in danger?”

I considered for a millisecond. “I don’t see how, at least on an immediate basis, ma’am. Medeiros doesn’t have anything that can bomb you from orbit. If we can keep the autofactories from him, or at least keep the printers away, that won’t change. If he gets a printer, or already has one, he still has to bootstrap up through all the automation needed for an autofactory, before he can start building something like an asteroid mover. And there’s no way he’ll be dumb enough to try to print anything explosive.”

“On the other hand…” Ito said in a slow drawl, inviting me to explain counterpoint.

I grinned. “On the other hand, we have no printer capability at the moment—although we are in possession of the actual printers, more or less—and we’d have to go through the same bootstrapping process. To a lesser extent, maybe, because we have roamers and drones and now the two androids.”

“So it’s détente.”

“I’m not sure it’s even at that level, ma’am. Right now it’s more like that Hugh Grant and Colin Firth fight scene in Bridget Jones’ Diary.”

She looked at me askance, then shook her head without asking. Apparently Mack already had a reputation.

“Look,” I continued, “If we can get one or more of the printers onto one of your worlds, and get enough raw elements down for it, and do all this without being intercepted by Medeiros, then we can maybe build busters or something.”

“That’s a lot of if’s,” Campbell replied.

“Well, it’ll depend on what Medeiros does next. I’m afraid we’re forced to react to his moves. Any attempt on our part to control the play will result in a missile down our throats.”

“How many missiles does he have?”

“Zero, we thought. So, unknown.”

Ito thought for a moment. “You have a number of mining drones, I understand. Can you use them to ram the Brazilian?”

It was a good try, and I nodded an acknowledgement. “Sorry, President Ito, but that would be like trying to ram a sports car with tractors. In principle, you could do damage, but first you have to catch him.”

Ito sighed and sat back. Again, there was a contemplative silence.

“Look,” I said, “If you think of anything, call, email, or text me. We’ll keep working on it from our end, and I’ll keep you updated.”

“Good enough.” Premier Campbell nodded and ended her connection. A moment later, Ito blinked out as well.

I sighed, sat back, and looked at the ceiling. Like the Others weren’t bad enough.

* * *

By the time Medeiros got to the nearest Lagrange autofactory location, we’d long since flung the printers and print heads well beyond his ability to detect them. The Bobs had also managed to hide, damage, or collect most of the autofactory automation, leaving nothing valuable except the actual metal ingots. We watched Medeiros from a non-SCUT drone, carefully disguised as flotsam, running on power cells so as not to show up on radiation detectors. It would run down soon, but if Medeiros didn’t pick up on it, we could collect it later. If he did, he would have gained only a regular mining drone, and one without a fusion reactor.

The Brazilian craft buzzed around, inspecting and searching, then settled on a single location and stopped moving. I half-expected some kind of raging and destroying things; but realistically, Medeiros was career military, and presumably well-disciplined. He wouldn’t waste missiles on petulance.

I hoped he would decide on a strategy before the drone gave out. We’d identified three possibilities: one, head for one of the colonies and set up a picket, on the presumption that we had sent at least one printer that way; two, head off and start scanning for printers and print heads on their lonely trajectories; or three, start looking for roamers and mining drones to either destroy or try to take over.

And finally, just when the drone was on its last few watts of stored power, Medeiros accelerated out of the area.

“Do we have an indication of where he’s going?”

I jerked in surprise. Too intent on watching Medeiros, I hadn’t realized that Will was visiting my VR. I turned to him. “I don’t think so. He’s just headed off in what appears to be some random direction. The power cells are about to give out, so we can’t track him by SUDDAR.”

Will muttered an expletive, a clear indication that the situation was getting to him. “We have to assume scenarios one or two, then, since they’re the worst cases. How many printers and heads have we rerouted to a colony?”

“Two of each going to each colony. Well spread out. Of course, he can spot them on approach with a SUDDAR sweep, but he’ll have to be close enough to physically intercept.”

“Then he’ll have to intercept without destroying them. Destruction is acceptable, from our point of view.”

I nodded. “This is going to be a long, drawn-out battle, Will.”

* * *

Garfield and I were sitting, drinking coffee, taking one of our increasingly rare breaks, when Guppy popped in.

[Printer convoy en route to Asgard has been hit with a SUDDAR sweep.]

Garfield and I looked at each other. “Crap”, he said. “That means he went for option one.”

“I guess it makes sense,” I replied. “For option two, he’d be scanning an increasingly large volume of space. This way, we are essentially coming to him.”

I turned to Guppy. “Were you able to triangulate?”

[Negative. Sweep was short range.]

“Smart,” Garfield said. “He doesn’t announce himself unless he makes contact, and if he does, he’s right on top of us.”

“Which means he’s right on top of us.” I smacked my forehead.

“Doesn’t matter, anyway. I checked, and this particular group has no SCUT. They’ll have to operate on standing orders.”

[Convoy has been disabled. Video feed cut off.]

Garfield and I exchanged a look. Had Medeiros simply blown up the convoy? Was his plan to deny us the printers?

Wordlessly, I called up the truncated video. Garfield watched the three-second sequence.

“Well, hell,” I said, when we were done. “It appears Medeiros can learn.”

“Mmm, hmm. He’s building busters. Or he built busters. Wait, when did he build busters?” Garfield frowned and continued, “If this is the Alpha Centauri Medeiros, then his first exposure to us was the day we razed their installation. He would have had to build busters after that. There was no indication that the Brazilians were building kinetic weapons before that point.”

I gave him a sickly grin. “Sorry, buddy, I guess you missed the conversation after the attack. We figure he has at least one printer of his own. So he learned from Alpha Centauri.”

“So why’s he doing what he’s doing?”

“Two-pronged strategy. Attempt to gather as many printers as he can, while denying them to us. Geometric progression means a small advantage up front can turn into an insurmountable lead, eventually.” I stared into space for a few milliseconds. “We have to take him out, now. If he gets ahead of us, the colonists are as good as dead.”

Garfield closed his eyes and shook his head slowly. “And we put them there.”

* * *

Captain Richards from the Asgard colony pressed his lips together and said nothing. He didn’t have to. On top of everything the colonists were dealing with, they now had Medeiros to worry about.

“Are you certain that he will attack the colony?”

“Not certain, captain. But he’s made it pretty clear on previous encounters that he is utterly loyal to Brazil, considers us to be at war, and isn’t interested in discussions. I’m also not entirely sure he’s sane at this point.” I looked over at Garfield, who rolled his eyes dramatically. “I’d hate to try communicating with him, only to find that we’d attracted his attention to the colonies.”

Richards nodded, and sat back with a huff. “And we have nothing.”

“Not that we’ve been able to find. We could ask Mack, if we could get him onto a cradle, but right now we can’t risk trying to fly his matrix in. We’re getting occasional glimpses of Medeiros, and he does his best to destroy anything he detects.”

“At both colonies? How many of him are there?” Richards frowned at me.

I thought for a second. “There’s no overlap in appearances, so there’s only one of him. But I think he’s programmed his busters to patrol and knock down anything they detect. Right now, he owns the high ground.”

General Kiroshi from the Japanese colony had been listening without comment in another video window. Now he spoke up. “We have only small printers, useful for quick manufacturing of minor items, but insufficient for anything like your busters. And it would take months to bootstrap up to real industrial printers.”

Richards nodded. “Same here. Ours are big enough to print more mosquito killers, but that’s—”

“Wait, what?” I sat up straight.

Richards raised an eyebrow. “Super vampire something something mosquitoes. Mack didn’t mention them?”

“Yes, I remember them.” I gave him a sideways glare. “I didn’t realize you were handling manufacturing yourselves.”

“Well, sure, because we needed thousands and Mack couldn’t be bothered. They’re about the size of a baseball, so not really useful for anything but mosquito patrol.”

“But…thousands?” I leaned forward, radiating interest.

Richards’ eyes started to grow rounder as he realized something was up. “Er, yes, most of them are on standby right now, since we seem to have beaten back the scourge. We were going to return them to raw materials eventually. But I think we had three or four thousand running around at one point.”

I let a slow smile grow on my face. “They may be small, but a few hundred hitting a buster at the same time will still have an effect. We may be able to clear the sky around Asgard long enough to get the printers to ground.”

“Can they even fly outside of atmosphere?”

“Not a problem, captain. It’s actually more trouble building them to fly in atmosphere.”

“Excellent,” the captain said. “Let’s get this operation going.”

* * *

The mosquito killers were too small to carry SCUT comms, so we had to give the AMIs complete enough instructions to handle any situation we could think of. One in each hundred was designated as an observer, ordered to send a video record back to the colony, if possible, or to record and return otherwise.

We sent off two thousand killers in five squads, hoping to catch as many busters as possible by surprise. A couple of killers were programmed to leak radio telemetry, which hopefully would attract some of Medeiros’ devices.

Captain Richards was mirroring everything to Kiroshi and myself. I watched the numerous video windows as the observers delivered status and telemetry.

“Got a blip,” Captain Richards announced.

I’d seen the change in the video window several milliseconds before, of course, but there was no good reason to remind him of my true nature.

The telemetry from the observer indicated two bogeys approaching the group. Per their orders, the killers changed course to intercept. We hoped that Medeiros hadn’t programmed caution into his busters. A bunch of baseball-sized objects hopefully wouldn’t trigger the default danger-avoidance routines.

The busters zeroed in on the noisy killers, seemingly ignoring the cloud of attendants. At the last possible moment, every single mosquito killer altered course to aim directly at the two busters. The change apparently registered with the dim AMI brains, because both busters went into hard turns. Too little, too late, though. The smaller and more maneuverable killers easily kept up with the change in vectors.

Contact wasn’t the dramatic flash we were used to seeing as two heavy devices collided at interplanetary speeds. The killers avoided the large steel ball up front and went for reactor cooling radiators, SURGE emitters, and other obvious signs of technology.

It was like being pelted in a hailstorm. The first couple dozen impacts had no real effect; then dents started to appear, followed by seams popping, then parts flying off. In less than thirty seconds, the busters were drifting aimlessly, and we still had more than a hundred killers left.

“See if you can get them to shepherd the parts into low orbit,” Richards suggested. “If we can rescue the material, great. Otherwise, we push it into atmosphere and deny it to Medeiros.”

I nodded. A good strategy. I wasn’t sure how we’d get that much mass down to ground level—other that the obvious way—but I’d worry about that once we had rescued some drones.

“Two down…” Richards grinned at me, then turned in his video window to face Kiroshi. “General, once we’ve cleared the Asgard environs, I’ll send a squad of mosquito killers your way.”

General Kiroshi nodded. “Thank you. Even if we are not ultimately successful, the process of attrition should keep Medeiros busy.”

“Yes,” I added. “We just need to knock off busters faster than he can make them. And if he’s making busters, he’s not making more printers.”

“We’ll keep at this, Bill.” Captain Richards nodded to me. “I’ll keep you up to date.”

Good enough. I still had a war with the Others to prepare for.





26. Cities in Fight



Marcus

September 2215

Poseidon

I watched the long-range image, which showed the expanding cloud of debris that used to be my Heaven vessel decoy. I’d been lying about my location for several months now, and the Council seemed to have bought it. Three Council security vessels left the area at far too high an acceleration for the cargo vessels they appeared to be. It would seem the Council could be sneaky as well.

I fired off a report to Riker, cc’d to Bill, and saved a backup to my Fortress of Solitude, circling Eta Cassiopeia B. If the Council ever found that, I’d be thoroughly hooped. Fortunately, that was unlikely. The Council still had fewer than a dozen ships, and the companion star simply hadn’t come up in discussions for a long time.

Of course, the Council had obviously been engaging in covert preparations as well, as evinced by the three souped-up and armed cargo ships. Now that they believed me dead, I hoped that they would openly play their hand.

I returned my presence to my android, which was standing at parade rest. As I moved my arms into a more relaxed position, everyone turned to me.

“Well?” Kal said.

I grinned at him. “Three very non-standard cargo vessels just took out my decoy vessel. It would have attempted evasive tactics consistent with its published specs. I’m sure the security personnel are very proud of themselves.”

“What about the cargo vessels?”

“I’ve got some stealth busters following them right now. But we don’t know what the Council’s total strength is, or where they’ve placed it. I have to assume that my estimate of a dozen ships is incorrect. We’ll have to take a wait-and-see stance until they show their hand. And remember, officially, I’m dead.”

Gina looked up from her phone and cut into the conversation. “They’ve moved on four cities: Lothar, Morbus, Xanator, and Gathol. Attempted to board and take over—you were right, they were trying to avoid damaging the cities.”

“Status?” I asked.

“Repelled with significant losses. They didn’t expect resistance.”

“They also didn’t expect,” Gina replied, “weapon systems that weren’t on the blueprints.”

I grinned. “My fault. I forgot to file the changes with the Permits department.”

Kal waved his phone. “They’ve made an announcement.”

We all turned to him, eager to hear what the Council had come up with. Kal read through the text, deliberately injecting a pompous tone into the pronouncement. When he was done, we all sat in a semi-circle, ready for a council of war.

“So, the takeaway,” I said, looking up at the dome overhead, “is that the evil, evil replicant is defunct and everyone should be good little citizens and come back to the mats. Or else.”

“And if we don’t, they’ll start shooting down cities in twenty-four hours.” Kal shook his head in exaggerated disbelief. “We’re at war now, even if the word hasn’t actually been used. Blowing Marcus up can’t really be misinterpreted.”

“I suppose they could take the stance that I’m not alive, therefore it was just a case of obsoleting some recalcitrant equipment.” I gave my friends a lopsided grin. “And the thing with those cities could be called a ‘police action’.”

Gina rolled her eyes at me, mocking my favorite expression. “Or they were just tired of listening to you talk. Now are you willing to start fighting?”

I shook my head. “I still don’t know where all their assets are. I want to take everything out cleanly in one strike. And I don’t want to have to kill anyone.”

“Good luck with that,” Kal muttered.



We spent the next few hours monitoring developments. Things seemed to have settled into a stalemate, with the Council making threats and the cities daring them to try, or simply remaining silent.

Then, more trouble.

Two ships came out of sunward and launched missiles at Amhor. My assets were all space-side, shadowing or searching for council assets, so I had nothing for defense. The city, though, had those undocumented features…

Particle-weapon turrets, courtesy of Bill’s Skunk Works, activated immediately and attempted to shoot the missiles out of the sky. The attackers responded by firing more missiles.

“I’m impressed,” I said. “The basic cargo-ship design doesn’t have a lot of room for weapons storage and launchers. I’d be interested in seeing how—”

“Chrissake, Marcus, we’re in danger here. Could you dial it back?”

I gave Kal a rueful smile by way of apology, then turned back to watch the drama.

The ships seemed to have emptied themselves of missiles, and our defensive batteries had taken out the first two missiles. The second pair were getting too close for comfort, though. And seemed to have figured out the defensive patterns, as they were evading all attempts to shoot them out of the sky.

With a flash of inspiration, I took control of a couple of flyers sitting in the docking bay. I sent them toward the missiles at full acceleration. Flyers were not military vehicles or flying explosives, so they really had no chance of catching or even intercepting an approaching missile. But they did have the effect of splitting the attention of the missile AMIs. It was just enough to slow down the dodging, and the defensive turrets blew both missiles out of the air.

The ships, now apparently unarmed, turned and flew off. I called a couple of drones from orbit to shadow them. If they flew back to a base somewhere to reload, I’d have a target.

But there was no time to celebrate our victory.

Kal leaped to his feet and uttered a string of profanities. Then he turned to look at the rest of us, and said, “The bastards shot down Thark.”

There were gasps and cries of shock, but not surprise. Thark and Amhor were the residences of what we somewhat ironically called the Revolutionary Council. We’d published disinformation, but somehow the Council had seen through it.

Regardless, the Council had just upped the ante.

Gina asked, “Survivors?”

Kal looked at his phone for several seconds, his eyes moving back and forth. I noticed that several other people were poking their tablets furiously.

“Escape pods were observed ejecting, before it hit water. But I’d bet not everyone got out.”

Gina glared at me. “Now we’re at war. They’re trying to hit us everywhere at once, to end it before we can react. It’s not going to stop until they think they’ve won. It will just continue to escalate, and more and more people will die. Now, Marcus.”

I sighed and nodded my head. Without a word, I deactivated my android and returned to VR. A quick status check at computer speeds showed that I had busters trailing all Council ships that we’d been able to locate. I ordered all busters to attack, concentrating on taking out the reactor or drive systems.

The subject of cloaking technology hadn’t really come up in conversation with the Council, so the ships were caught flat-footed. All clean shots, there should be no deaths unless someone was standing right by the reactor at the wrong time. Escape pods ejected from all of them.

None of which would help with the Council. For that, I activated phase 2.

The ouncil had set up security at strategic locations such as power stations and flyer depots, as well as roving patrols to ensure citizens stayed put and obeyed curfews. I gave the command, and cargo drones dropped off squads of roamers throughout the Northern and Southern mats. I’d learned the utility of roamers as foot soldiers, almost a hundred years ago in New Handeltown. This time, I had more than just the twenty-centimeter models available.

All over the towns and industrial sections, Council security forces found themselves set upon by roamers, from the one-inch models that would try to crawl down your pants, right up to the two-meter heavy-lifting models—every single one armed with plasma cutters, pliers, and a total lack of fear.

Within ten minutes, I got the all-clear from Gina, who was coordinating with local resistance. I pulled up a video window. “Have you located the Council members yet?”

Gina shook her head. “No, as we expected, their published locations were all bogus. Chances are their movement history is at least partly fiction, as well. We’re analyzing on the basis of defensibility and obscurity.”

I nodded. “My money is still on subs.”

Gina snorted. “If so, they can stay out there all they want. I’m not going to risk an encounter with a kraken or hydra just to capture those turds.”

“Maybe the wildlife will take care of it for us.”

Kal popped up in another call window, joining the conference. “We’ve got control of the comms center. Want me to send out an all-points?”

“Do it.” I nodded. “And see if you can get an update on Thark.”

“Already done. We’ve pulled about half the population out of the drink,” Kal responded. “Still scanning for more pods. At the moment, there are about a hundred and fifty people missing.”

I closed my eyes, feeling nauseated. We’d admitted the possibility of casualties, but the reality—even a potential reality, at the moment—was so much harder to take.

“Okay, Kal. Keep me updated.”

When I had time, I would have to do some soul-searching. Between the Poseidon revolution, the Sol System War, and the overthrow of New Jerusalem, my various incarnations seemed to always be in the thick of things.

How many deaths was I answerable for?





27. Repairs



Herschel

July 2227

Delta Pavonis

There’s no real reason for your Virtual Reality self to be tense. I knew that. It didn’t help. I found myself gritting my teeth so hard that my jaw began to ache.

After months of investigation and tinkering, Neil and I were ready to try activating the power core. We had the nuclear deterrent sitting in the middle of the central corridor, just in case. But truthfully, neither of us really thought it would be necessary. The wiring had eventually succumbed to our detective work, and we were confident that we would be able to power up the core without powering up the bays.

Which still left the question of activating the power core. Since we’d never seen this particular technology before, there was a lot of guesswork involved. Needless to say, guesswork and power cores did not go well together.

We weren’t total idiots—we were standing off more than a thousand klicks, while the roamers and drones ran through the final steps. I idly wondered, for a moment, if the AMIs ever got tired of wearing the red shirts. Probably not, or they’d have gone on strike by now.

“If this doesn’t work, we’re going to be in deep doo-doo.” Neil glanced sideways at me.

“Better than being a cloud of ionized gas. And even if it does work, there are going to be questions, Neil. We really should have announced the find on the first day.”

“You. But. I…” Neil glared at me, one side of his mouth up in a sneer of disbelief. “I hate you.”

I grinned at him. “Okay, joking aside, buddy. We’re eighth-generation Bobs. Pondscum. Star Trek security looks down their noses at us. I’d like to have something under my belt that I can stamp on my hull.”

Neil took a deep breath, let it out slowly. “Yeah. If everything goes well, all will be forgiven.”

“So…”

“Scanning started,” Neil responded, taking the hint. “We have an image. Okay, Herschel, any time.”

I gave the order, and the roamers started the activation procedure in Hulk-1. It took almost three minutes for the alien equipment to go through whatever startup sequence it needed. We could review the whole thing later via the recorded SUDDAR video.

And finally, pay dirt. Lights came on in the alien craft. Readings indicated rising power levels in engineering subsystems. We’d been careful to ensure that most of the vessel remained unpowered. We certainly didn’t want to activate a security system somewhere.

The roamers ran a few output tests, and reported the results. I whistled. “That’s just a stupid level of power generation. Assuming it’s linear.”

“Remember that scene in Forbidden Planet with the power meters?” Neil grinned at me. “This is just like that. We’re barely tilting the first meter.”

I nodded, eyes unfocussed. “I, uh, think it might be time to pay Bill a visit.”

* * *

“Well, there are no laws in the Bobiverse, of course…” Bill’s expression belied the casualness of his tone. Neil and I looked at each other nervously.

“But you guys are still morons.” Bill raised his hands in an I give up gesture. “If something had gone wrong and taken you out, we’d never have known about it.”

“We’ve been doing backups, Bill…”

“And how would we know to activate your backup? ESP?”

“Oh…” Yeah, there’s that. I looked down at my shoes.

Bill relented a little, seeing my expression. “Actually, Herschel, that’s another project I’m working on. The battle of Delta Pavonis made it clear that we need a more organized backup system.”

He waved us toward chairs and called in Jeeves. It looked like we wouldn’t be flayed, after all.

“Okay, fill me in.”

I sat down and accepted a coffee. I took a moment for a sip, to give me time to calm my nerves. Then I called up the diagrams and schematics, as well as video records. “You already know the basics. We found the hulks, got the power system working in one of them. The power core is not fusion-based. I’d almost swear it uses some variation on the Casimir Effect. There’s a separate analysis on that.”

I pushed one set of schematics aside, to bring up a larger-scale diagram. “Hulk-2 is scrap. We’ve been through it from one end to the other, and there’s nothing interesting. It’s basically a big ol’ pile of salvage. We’ve had our devices breaking it down into transportable chunks for a couple of months now. But here’s the thing…” I paused for effect. “Hulk-1 is a big, sort-of-hollow container with built-in power. The A.I. and drive systems are gone, of course, but so what?” I grinned at Bill.

Bill frowned, and I realized he hadn’t gotten it yet. I looked at Neil, suddenly uncertain. Had we missed something obvious? Were we about to paint ourselves as total twits?

Neil rolled his eyes, just the tiniest amount, then turned to Bill. “Put a set of mover plates around it, Bill, and it’s the biggest damn colony ship ever made. It just needs stasis pods.”

Bill’s eyes slowly grew wide as the penny dropped. “Holy—”

I grinned, confidence returning. “And you could move the entire remaining Earth population in one trip!”





28. Payback



Bob

April 2224

Eden

Caerleon was a busy area—almost frantic. Maybe it was the age of the residents, and the relative lack of family groups. Caerleon had been colonized by juveniles just into puberty and going through the adolescent rebellion stage. Marvin and I agreed that we’d created a baby boomer generation when we moved everyone to Camelot and the birth rate subsequently surged. All those teenagers, getting hormonal at the same time, had probably just egged each other on.

At any rate, it made sneaking up a difficult operation. I had the advantages of lack of scent and ability to stay completely still, of course. Plus some commando camouflage tricks that I looked up in the ship libraries. Still, it took almost five hours to maneuver into position. Original Bob would have been a single giant muscle cramp by that point, but android muscles didn’t get tired.

And I was now in position. Surveillance had shown that Fred had a preferred location for his bodily functions, and he was very much a creature of habit. I picked a spot where I could take him on the way back, and settled down to wait.

* * *

As Fred turned back to the trail, I slammed into him. Shoving him up against a tree, I placed the edge of my flint knife against his throat.

“Hello, Fred. Remember our last conversation?”

Fred’s eyes were wide with fear, and he made no attempt to struggle.

“I own you right now, kuzzi.” I practically spit his favorite insult back in his face. “Whether you live to see the sun set today depends on my mood. Understand?”

Fred understood. The odor of fear emanated from him. But he apparently wasn’t going to just fold. “My friends won’t let this go,” he said. “They’ll come after you.”

And he was right. This was something I’d worried about, but had hoped I wouldn’t have to deal with. If he didn’t capitulate in some manner, I might actually end up having to kill him. Could I do that in cold blood? If he just dug in his heels and called my bluff, I’d have to either follow through or lose any credibility.

On the other hand, if I’d come with Donald, Fred would already be dead.

It was so tempting. But even after being embedded in Deltan civilization for all these years, I still had a 21st century human squeamishness about taking life.

“What’s your problem, Fred? Can’t hunt on your own? Can’t figure out which end of the spear to use? Or are you just lazy?”

Fred’s ears went flat and his lips curled back from his teeth in a reaction that, for a Deltan, was an expression of rage. “It’s so easy for you, isn’t it? Sit there with all the resources and yap about how everyone else isn’t living up to your standards? I’m not answerable to you.”

“Well, right now you kind of are.” I pushed the blade harder against his throat to make the point.

But Fred was angry now. His reaction, his unexpected rage, surprised me. I’d mishandled this somehow, and now there was no way he was going to back down. Interesting food for thought, but right now it left me between a rock and a hard place.

With a flash of inspiration, I directed a spy drone to make some suspicious noises, in order to draw over some of the locals. Within moments, Fred and I could both hear his friends approaching and calling for him. He grinned at me in triumph. If his friends found a corpse, the whole village would be after me.

That was fine. Let him think that. I put my face up close to his. “Just remember that I can find you whenever I want. Next time I won’t discuss it, won’t even let you know I’m there. Maybe you should start hanging around with your friends all the time.”

With that, I gave him the usual quick jab in the breadbasket, and grabbed his spear as he folded. I vanished into the forest just before his friends came into sight.

Well, that hadn’t gone quite according to plan. I made my way back to Camelot, still trying to convince myself that I could kill him if I had to.

* * *

I told Archimedes the story over dinner. He took Fred’s spear and examined it while I talked.

“Donald would have just killed him,” he said. “Me, not so much. It’s hard to kill people, unless they’re attacking you.”

Archimedes maneuvered the spear around until he was looking at the tip. “This is really terrible work. Someone just shattered a nodule, and tied the sharpest shard onto the shaft.” He shook his head. “It’s as likely to fall off as penetrate the target. If this is what they have, I’m not surprised they’re having to steal food from our hunters.”

I raised my eyebrows. Okay, the android actually pointed its ears forward and down, but it felt to me like the equivalent human expression.

If the Caerleon citizens were having less hunting success because of equipment failure… Could it be that easy? Perceived inequities like that had started more than one war on Earth. I liked to think Deltans were a little more sensible than humans in general, but not by that much.

I sat back against the boulder behind me and stared into space, considering the options.





29. Looming Storm



Howard

May 2220

Vulcan

I stood outside the courtroom, taking deep breaths. I had an almost uncontrollable urge to drop a rock on the building. I’d expected nastiness. Ms. Benning had warned me that the children’s strategy would be based on attacks.

Knowing it and being subjected to it were two different things, though. To listen to their lawyer, I was some weird cross between Rasputin, Svengali, Machiavelli, and Lucifer. They hadn’t quite accused me of drugging and brainwashing Bridget, but they’d sure been trying to imply it.

Ms. Benning came to stand beside me. “There will be more of the same after recess. Just remember that he’s trying to get a rise out of you, to get you to make a mistake.”

I smiled slightly. “I have some advantages in that area.” Indeed. During cross-exam, I had enabled the endocrine control system. Funny that the cloning process, even with all the different generations of Heaven vessels, still included that subsystem. With the control on, I was only mildly concerned about Mr. Kistler’s accusations and innuendo.

And a good thing. Right now, I would happily reach over and crush his throat with one hand.

Dr. Onagi came over to stand with us. I looked at him. “Is it appropriate for us to speak?”

He looked at Ms. Benning, who smiled in response. “Not a problem. The hospital is named in their suit as well, so we’re on the same side. What’s on your mind, Dr. Onagi?”

“I don’t trust them.”

“Erm, this is news?” I raised an eyebrow at him.

“No, no, I mean beyond the obvious adversarial situation. In particular, the eldest daughter just seems like a real piece of work. I wonder, if they lose the case, if she’ll take it gracefully.”

Ms. Benning’s eyebrows rose. “You mean, as in sabotage of some kind?”

Dr. Onagi nodded.

Oh, wow. I couldn’t actually feel the blood drain from my face—no blood, after all—but the elevator-dropping feeling was definitely there. “We could win, and still lose.”

“This bears some careful thought,” Ms. Benning said. “Being found in contempt of a court order could prejudice your case, so don’t do anything precipitous. Just the same…”

We settled into an uncomfortable silence as we each stared into space.





30. Armageddon



Bill

June 2223

82 Eridani

I was going over some plans with Garfield when I received an emergency call from Captain Richards. I popped up the video window. “What’s up, captain?”

“Bill, we were doing so well with clearing the busters from orbit that I decided I could spare a dozen or so killers to reconnoiter the Lagrange points. To see what Medeiros is up to, you understand?”

I nodded, not liking the implication.

Richards popped up a grainy, long-distance image. “We picked this up.”

The frame rate and resolution were low, but I could make out that Medeiros was working around the metal ingots used as raw materials for the autofactories.

“What’s he doing?” I asked.

“We ran some image interpolations. It looks like he’s attaching busters to an ingot with cables.”

“Oh, hell.” A poor man’s asteroid mover. The ingots weren’t huge, but they were metal, and would survive re-entry almost unscathed. One of those could certainly create a new Barringer crater. More than enough to wipe out a colony, anyway.

“This advances our schedule. How are you doing with the printers?”

“We’ve got a half-dozen.” Richards grimaced. “One is working on a cradle for Mack, three are working on drones and roamers, and two are producing small busters, per your plans.” He shook his head. “What’s with twenty-kilogram busters, anyway?”

I gave him a weak smile. “Something Bob has been using as anti-personnel weapons. But our experience with the mosquito killers shows that more small attackers can be as effective as a few large attackers—and more flexible. Medeiros will probably be putting more armor on his busters by now, so the killers are going to be less effective. So these will up the ante.”

“So do we switch to nothing but busters?”

“Not just yet, Captain. We can do without Mack for now, but we need drones and roamers, for assembly if nothing else. I’ll run a min-max analysis to figure out what mix of construction will get us the best return. I’ll let you know.”

We nodded and disconnected at the same time. I turned to Garfield, who had been listening to the whole exchange.

“He’s planning on just smashing things, isn’t he?” Garfield looked gray with worry.

“It seems to be a theme with the Brazilian probes, Gar. I don’t know if that’s a cultural thing, or military conditioning, or something that Brazilian scientists installed as imperatives when they were building the replicants.”

“Or they’re all insane.”

I shrugged. “Doesn’t matter, in the end. We have to react to the threat. And I don’t see any reason to change the no-quarter policy on Medeiros.”

Garfield’s only reply was a snort of agreement.

* * *

“He’s started moving the ingot.” Richards glared at me out of the video window.

“How did he manage that?” I asked. “He was nowhere near having enough busters, just yesterday.”

Richards shrugged. “He still doesn’t, really. I think he’s starting before he’s really ready. The acceleration is vanishingly small.”

“But he can add more in-flight, as he makes them.”

Richards nodded. “Unfortunately, it’s too soon to tell which colony he’s aiming for. He may not even have decided yet. It’ll be another twenty-four hours before he has to commit.”

“We have printers on both colonies, now, right?” I started to run my hand through my hair, then caught myself. “So there’s no advantage to him one way or the other. My money’s on Asgard, simply because he can get it there sooner.”

“We have to move on him now.” Richards set his jaw. “I’ll contact General Kiroshi, see what he can put in the air.”

“Do that, Captain. Call me back.”

* * *

“It’s not enough,” Kiroshi said. “We are two busters short of a one-on-one matchup, and that’s without dealing with Medeiros himself. We can’t win this.”

“And that’s assuming we have eyes on all his devices. If he’s carrying a couple in his hold, it will put us even farther behind.”

“I don’t see it,” I replied, looking at Richards. “If he had more, they’d be pulling the ingot as well.”

“Do we have a choice?”

I sighed. “Not really, Captain. The longer we wait, the harder it will be to redirect the ingot. And by the time it actually gets here, we’ll have built two more busters at the most.”

There were a few more comments, but we all knew we really had no choice. These busters would have to be preprogrammed, as we couldn’t afford the time to add SCUT comms. We sent them out from both colonies, timed to arrive simultaneously.

I was about to disconnect, when I had a thought. “Gentlemen, how many mosquito killers do we have left? And where are they?”

Kiroshi answered. “A little over two hundred. They’re all in orbit around Takama. We haven’t had any close-in encounters at either colony for a few days. Why?”

“Let’s throw them into the mix, General. I’ll do some calculations, and give you the times and vectors.”

* * *

Our busters arrived at the expected time and place. Because they were operating without SCUTs, we were getting the video play-by-play several minutes after the fact. Whatever was going to happen had already happened.

There could be no finesse on this operation. Each one of our busters could take out one of Medeiros’ busters. We would aim several busters at Medeiros himself, but he would use his busters to intercept. Barring a miracle and him missing one, we’d be left with Medeiros and two busters to deal with.

We watched as fourteen video images closed in on fourteen targets, then fourteen video images disappeared.

“Well, that was textbook,” Richards said.

I smiled tightly. “And right about now, Medeiros should be feeling pretty smug.”

Two new video windows popped up as the incoming mosquito killers zeroed in on Medeiros. We knew we would leave two of Medeiros’ busters, but we made sure those busters were tethered to the ingot and unavailable for defense.

Medeiros detected the incoming killers and turned tail, but he was far too late. Unlike the busters, which had decelerated to arrive at the battleground at a controllable velocity, the killers had continued to accelerate all the way from Takama. They arrived with a considerable momentum; fewer than half struck the Brazilian ship, but a hundred small impacts were still sufficient to open up the side of his vessel. Medeiros lost his line and began to drift.

“He’s down,” Richards said. “Not sure if he’s dead, but propulsion is offline.”

“Do we have any more busters? Any more killers?” Kiroshi looked from one to the other of us.

I shook my head. “Busters are all expended. There are lots of killers, but they’re travelling away from Medeiros at high speed. They’ll take as long to decelerate as they took to accelerate to that velocity, then they have to accelerate back.”

“He might still be out by the time they get back. We don’t know how many roamers he has left after the space battle over Mack.”

That was true. It was certainly worth a shot, anyway. “Okay, General. I’m sending orders to the killers now. Light speed delay will add to the total turnaround time. I think we’re looking at twenty-two hours before they get back.”

Richards frowned. “Hell, we could get a couple of drones there in less time than that.”

“To do what? Even at full acceleration, they’re unlikely to do much damage.”

“I was thinking more along the lines of grabbing Medeiros himself.”

I stared at Richards. That hadn’t occurred to me. Stick some roamers in the drones’ holds, and they could enter the Brazilian ship and extract the replicant matrix. I felt a twinge of nausea at what we were not-quite planning. Memories of Homer, of the five cubes back on Earth during Bob-1’s training, swirled with images from my imagination of Mack under Medeiros’ thumb. But we were dealing with someone who was about to drop a metal meteor on a colony. Squeamishness was inappropriate.

* * *

The drones approached the Brazilian ship, which was still drifting. We’d decided this was important enough to sacrifice all of Asgard’s roamers, save two for rebuilding. This would be almost like a beach assault. Anything short of one hundred percent casualties would be acceptable.

The two drones came in as quickly as their drives could manage, braking with no leeway to arrive at rest just outside the rent in the enemy vessel. Cargo doors popped open and eight roamers, including two of the big industrial-size units, stormed across the gap. The squad headed straight for the location of the replicant matrix—we knew the layout from Bob-1’s first encounter with Medeiros, way back in Epsilon Eridani.

The roamers encountered immediate resistance, from the onboard roamers. The battle was short and furious—Medeiros was fighting for his life, now. The standard roamers worked to protect the big units, as those would be needed for moving the matrix. Plasma cutters flashed, and roamer parts floated around the enclosed space.

The battle tilted in our direction once we realized that we could still use the big units. Any time an enemy roamer got too close, an industrial unit lashed out with a leg. If the impact didn’t disarticulate the victim outright, being bounced off a wall took it out of the fight for a few moments.

Soon, we were down to one or two defenders—depending on how you counted body parts. Then the last roamer was dispatched, and—

“What the hell?” I exclaimed as all video feeds disappeared.

Garfield poked at consoles. “The cargo drones are gone, too. They’ve—wait a moment, that’s not true. I’m still getting telemetry from number 2. I’ll try to activate a camera.”

Richards jerked in surprise in his video window as the event registered at the human timescale. “What happened?”

“Looks like Medeiros fell on his sword rather than be captured,” Garfield said. He popped up a video window. “This is what the second drone is showing. It’s damaged, by the way. Won’t be flying back on its own.”

The window showed the Brazilian vessel, or what was left of it. Pieces of spaceship spun and caught the sunlight as they receded. The ship was cut in two, and the two halves had been opened like flowers.

“He knew,” I said. “He knew he was finished. I don’t know if he thought he was taking the victory away from us, or thought we’d capture him and extract secrets.” I shook my head. “I will never understand Medeiros. I really hope this is the last time I have to deal with him.”

“That’s a little worrying, though,” Garfield commented. “I remember him being a bit on the pompous side, at the first meeting with Bob-1. This time around he never said a word. Not even an exit monologue. I wonder what secrets he might feel the need to take to the grave.”

An excellent question, and the expression on Richards’ and Kiroshi’s faces showed the same concern that I felt.

* * *

“Never even saw him coming,” Mack said. He sat in my VR, holding a coffee, feet up on a footstool. “I remember talking to you about draining the swamps on Takama, and the next thing I know, I’m back in my default VR.”

“Yeah, he hit you square on.” I raised my coffee. “You can go over the videos at your leisure, but you missed some interesting times.”

“Which aren’t over, I’m afraid.” Mack looked at his coffee, a frown forming. “We have to assume Medeiros is still out there, in one form or another. We’ll have to set up defenses, especially here and in Alpha Centauri.”

“That’s right, buddy. The colonies are okay with you diverting all printers to defensive items until you have a minimum level of ordnance.”

“Yep. Busters, then a new vessel, then some clones, then more printers... It’ll be a while before I’m able to support the colonies directly.”

“They’ll do what they can with groundside printers, Mack. Might be a good idea for them to have at least a small autofactory on each planet, just on principle.”

Mack nodded, staring into space. “Just when we think we’ve got things figured out, the universe throws another curve.”

I grinned at him. “Well, that’s life.”





31. Cleanup



Marcus

September 2215

Poseidon

The loss of their main fleet was a blow to the Council, but not a fatal one, as it turned out. Maybe I’d been underestimating the Council, or maybe they had someone who was a terrific strategist. Whatever the reason, the Council kept coming up with surprises.

The first surprise, although I’d suspected as much, was that they didn’t have just the dozen cargo ships. Our first inkling of that came the day after our takeover of strategic ‘ground’ assets.

“We’ve got several cities under attack!” Gina announced, sitting up abruptly.

Kal opened one eye—he was lying on a blanket, getting some sun—and said, “With what?”

“See for yourselves.” Gina held her tablet up. On it was shown a grainy, obviously blown-up image of a vessel. It appeared to my eye to be a variation on a version-3 Heaven vessel.

“Interesting. Looks like they’ve been reading BobNet,” I said. “I don’t know why that didn’t occur to me. I wouldn’t normally think of it as strategic information.”

“And yet the improvements the Bobs have been making in the Heaven design have been primarily for military purposes,” Kal responded.

“Plus,” Denu added, “if they’ve been perusing BobNet, wouldn’t they have found out about the cloaking?”

I raised an eyebrow at Denu, then exited the android and frame-jacked. A quick scan of recent BobNet blogs reassured me on that front.

Returning to normal time, and to the android, I responded, “There’s nothing but general descriptions, Denu. With all the crap happening, Bill’s just been transmitting plans directly to other Bobs. A bit of serendipity, there.” I didn’t add that I’d just sent off a description of this situation to Bill. Hopefully, he would scan the blogs for any other potentially damaging information and remove it. Great. We’d just re-invented military secrecy.

Gina, who had continued monitoring the situation, announced, “Aanthor, Kaol, and Ptarth are fending off missiles. It looks like whoever is still fighting has decided to go for a scorched earth policy. They’re not even trying to board, just trying to knock the cities out of the sky.” She looked over at me.

I nodded. Reluctant as I was to get directly involved, in this case, hundreds of lives were at stake. I ordered several squads of busters down from their hiding place on Pelias, the inner moon.

“It’ll take a few minutes for them to get there,” I said to Gina. “Can you tell the cities that help is coming?”

Gina nodded and typed furiously for a few moments. “Done.”

“This is unbelievable.” Denu shook his head. “They’re just trying to kill people.”

“It’s war, Denu,” Gina replied. “It’s not what we wanted, but apparently it’s what the Council finds preferable to losing. Although I don’t think they expected it to go this far, either. Most of their recent moves look more like ad libs than strategies.” She looked at me. “Three Council members still outstanding. This could be orders from any or all of them.”

“My money’s on Brennan, though.” Kal glanced at each of us. “Some of the others at least seemed to be misguided but well-intentioned. He was all about the power.”

“Maybe. Let’s get this done, then we can worry about assigning blame.” I looked up as my heads-up display showed the busters coming up on the fields of battle. I ordered them to take out the attackers—if possible, by taking out critical systems, but otherwise by whatever worked.

In seconds, the reports came back. Four ships downed by clean reactor strikes, three more totally destroyed. The two remaining ships turned tail and fled.

I took a moment to mourn the people I’d just killed. Very probably they were just following orders. But those orders had meant knocking a city containing several hundred civilians out of the sky. There was a point where following orders didn’t cut it.

I put a couple of cloaked drones on the tail of the escaping ships, and recalled my surviving busters. If there had been any doubt in the Council’s teeny minds that the cursed replicant was still extant, this engagement had removed it. The Council forces would be moving much more cautiously in the future.

“Tell the city defenders not to shoot down the surviving ships,” I said to Gina. “They might lead us back to the leadership.”

Gina nodded, and we settled back onto the grass. It was an odd juxtaposition—revolutionary leaders, in the middle of a shooting war, directing operations while lounging on a manicured lawn.

* * *

I tracked the fleeing ships to a relatively small mat in the northern current, earmarked as an automated farming platform. Video images from the drones showed it to be anything but. A small but well-stocked airbase was probably the home of the Council fleet.

“Well, that’s not good.” Kal shook his head. “We’ll have to check absolutely every mat on inventory, now.”

I grinned at him. “Seems the Council has been planning for this for a long time.”

“Or at least, planning for something,” he replied. “I can’t see how they could have predicted your flying cities.”

I nodded at that. “This doesn’t really look military, though. Security forces, maybe. Let’s send in the roamers and a mop-up squad.”

Kal nodded. He and Gina started typing furiously, while I worked on loading up the roamer squad into cargo drones.

* * *

It took longer than expected to prepare for our assault. I was surprised to discover that, with all the buzzing around and knocking out enemy ships and missiles, I was down to the dregs with busters and roamers. And without the system printers under my command, I couldn’t immediately print more. In the end, Gina rounded up a squad of security people, and we stormed the defenders the old-fashioned way.

Sort of. I was still far happier with sacrificing an AMI than a human.

Gina led the charge herself. The busters couldn’t smash the buildings at speed—I didn’t want to kill anyone—but they could smack gun emplacements hard enough to force defenders back.

“Concentrate on all defenders on the west walls,” Gina’s voice ordered over the comm system. Our security people set up a blistering fire which kept the defenders down.

“Marcus, there’s a weak spot on the wall at the southwest side. Can you get an explosive into there?”

“Uh, no, no explosives, Gina. Still too dangerous to print. But…”

A weak spot was easy to target. A ship buster came in at about a hundred klicks and rammed the corner of the wall. Five hundred kilograms of steel completely did a number on it. Maybe a little too well. As usual, I seemed to be a little more enthusiastic with the ramming than was really required.

“Thanks, Captain Crash. All units, enter with caution.”

I sent in some roamers as well, although all I had left were the little guys. The video feed showed a stunned, dust-covered group with no fight left in them.

“I think they’re done, Gina. It’s all mop-up.”

* * *

Gina, normally a somewhat dour, brooding person, was grinning unabashedly. “We got Brennan. No question that he ordered the attacks. We’ll be debriefing the security people we captured, but I’ll bet none of the other Council members were involved in this.”

“Still, they’ll all have to be dealt with. There will be trials. There will likely be convictions. Then there will be the question of what to do with them.” Kal shrugged. “My money’s on menial labor.”

Gina blew out a noisy breath. “Yeah, let’s not count our chickens just yet. We don’t know if there are any more loci of resistance. We may get individuals who keep fighting back, but hopefully we can contain the damage from that. As long as there are no more Council members in the wind, though, I think that’s it for anything organized.”

“The biggest thing will be accounting for all the remaining Council members, then.” Kal looked at me.

“Sorry buddy, I don’t have any special tricks for finding individuals on an entire planet.” I gave him a crooked smile. “Or off-planet, which is also a possibility.”

“Oy.” Kal rubbed the bridge of his nose with two fingers. “This really came down to the wire. If we’d had to fight just one more battle, we probably would have run out of assets. Do you have the printers back?”

I nodded. “And I’ve already started replacement construction, but it’ll be a few days before anything pops out the other end. If we do find ourselves another fight—” I looked pointedly at Gina. “—we’d probably better go for containment rather than a punch-up.”

Kal nodded. “Meanwhile, we also have a whole society to put back together. I hope you guys are okay with overtime.”

We all grinned back at him.





32. Found



Bill

September 2227

Epsilon Eridani

I stared at the readings, frankly disbelieving. I glanced over at Garfield—his wide eyes and slack jaw said it all.

We’d slapped together a quick prototype, based on the power-core scans from the alien hulk. A small prototype. According to our measurements, this kludged-together rig was outperforming our fusion reactors five to one.

“Well, this explains a lot,” Garfield finally said.

“Mmm. Of course, we’re not just going to rip out all our reactors and replace them with this stuff.”

“Well, no.” Garfield grinned at me. “But a pilot project…”

At that moment, Will popped in.

“Hey, guys. What’s this I hear about some Others’ cargo vessels?”

I motioned Will to a chair and materialized some images. “The two Bobs who volunteered to survey the Delta Pavonis system chanced upon a couple of cargo vessels that had been taken out during the defensive engagement. They must have drifted right through the system. The Others didn’t pick up on it, and the derelicts would have just continued out into the cosmos if those two hadn’t found them.”

Will leaned forward and poked at one of the images. “I think I remember that one, actually. It was almost cut in half.”

I nodded. “That unit is being broken down for materials. The guys are repairing the hole in the other one, and they’ve had the bright idea—genius, actually—of putting mover plates around it instead of trying to figure out the Others’ drive system. Then they’ll fly it back to Earth.”

“You could put fourteen million people in that thing, easily.” Will’s voice was hushed.

I laughed. “You could misplace fourteen million people in that thing.” I made a show of feeling around my pockets. “Dang it, where did I put those colonists…”

Will grinned back at me. “Holy crap on a cracker. Fifteen hundred ships or fifteen hundred trips. Or one gigantic cargo carrier!”





33. Project



Herschel

October 2227

Delta Pavonis

Be careful what you wish for. Uh huh. I was visiting Neil, while we took a break. He’d draped himself across his chair sideways and was doing a good imitation of a boneless corpse. I could remember sitting like that when original Bob was a teenager. Neil had a couple of behaviors that seemed to hearken back to Bob’s adolescence.

“Friggin’ hell,” he finally moaned. “Can we go back to being pondscum? Life was so much easier!”

I laughed, and signaled Jeeves for a beer. Neil had a template for a particularly good ale, and I tried to make a point of having one when I was visiting. I sat down, took a drink, then called up the project plan. “Well, we’re a little ahead of schedule, buddy. You could afford to take a few milliseconds off.”

“Oh, hah hah. You are too funny.” Neil straightened up. “Well, at least we’ve finally finished cutting up Hulk-2. Loading it all into Hulk-1’s cargo bays is routine enough to be left to the AMIs. But building the mover plates…”

“Yeah, I know. We weren’t really anticipating having to deploy our printers when we came out here. It’s a pain…” We grinned at each other and said, in unison, “but it’s a good pain!”

“Anyway,” I continued. “Moot is in a half-hour. You might want to get organized.”

Neil scowled at me, then pulled up his files. He muttered something about slavery, but got to work.

* * *

The moot was crowded, but that was normal, these days. There had been a problem with despondency for a few months after the loss of Delta Pavonis 4, but we’d bounced back. Now the Bobs were more determined than ever to deal out some payback.

Neil and I picked a spot close to the podium. Normally, we’d be at the back, as befitted pondscum, but we were now Project Leaders. Of course, we were also project workers, project gophers, and project janitorial staff, but who’s counting? We would be expected to give a status report on the Derelicts Project.

Bill mounted the podium, held the air-horn above his head, and gave the traditional blaaat. The audience greeted him with the usual catcalls and boos. I stayed silent, and I noticed that Neil was more reticent than usual, as well. It was much harder to be an agitator when we were standing up front.

Bill looked around the audience, waiting for the commentary to die down. When he had quiet, he began to speak.

“I’m going to start off with a bombshell. Starting twenty days ago, a number of our monitoring drones around GL 877 were attacked. Per their standing instructions, they self-destructed immediately. In the last two instances, the drones weren’t attacked, but chased.”

This news was met with gasps from the audience. Neil and I stared at each other, bug-eyed with shock, and he mouthed, “They know.”

Bill waited a moment for the chatter to die down. “We figure the Delta Pavonis harvesting expedition reported back to the Others’ home world, and they correctly concluded that they were under surveillance. Based on the attempt to capture the last two drones, they may have surmised that we have a technological advantage of some kind.”

A hologram of the GL 877 system popped up in the air, showing the location of the surveillance drones around the system. Bill made a gesture with his hand, and one by one, drones were replaced by small explosion graphics.

“We’re reconfiguring, but as we lose drones, our coverage will get spotty. We’re biasing them toward the near side of GL 877, to catch any expeditions coming our way. We’re also introducing some randomness in their positions, just to make it more difficult for the Others to find the drones. There haven’t been any new attacks in the last week, so that may be working. And Mario will be replacing the drones on a priority basis. But we’ll still be deficient for a few years.”

Neil edged up to me. “Something smells.”

“What?”

“There’s something about this scenario that bothers me. Why’d they stop?”

“Because they realized they couldn’t catch the drones? Because we randomized the locations?”

“Nope. Not sufficient.” Neil opened his mouth to add something, but at that moment, Bill decided to introduce us.

“Now, you’ve all been hearing about the Derelict Project. Herschel and Neil are here today to give you their first official update.” Bill gestured toward us.

I could feel myself blushing furiously as we mounted the podium. I looked around at the sea of Bobs, and my voice locked up.

Neil, familiar with my stage fright, picked up smoothly. “On a recon flight, we found a couple of Others’ cargo vessels drifting out of the Delta Pavonis system. One was pretty much totaled, but the other was almost intact, with damage limited to A.I. and drive systems. We were able to reactivate the power core—there’s a separate report on what we’ve been able to figure out about the technology.”

Neil turned to me and gestured. He’d given me just the right amount of time to get it together. I picked up the thread smoothly. “We’ve broken down the totaled derelict, and have been using the materials to do repairs on the Bellerophon.”

The assembled Bobs picked up on our chosen name, and we received whistles and whoops of approval. When the approbation died down, I continued, “Rather than trying to rebuild the drive, we’re just manufacturing mover plates—Bill figures 24 will be enough—to fly the whole thing to Earth. We’ve loaded the extra material from the other derelict into the hold, and we’ll be manufacturing stasis pods during the voyage.”

I looked around for Riker, but couldn’t see him, so I looked at Bill. “We’re thinking that if Earth would shift some manufacturing capacity into stasis pods, we could move a lot of people in one shot.”

I glanced around at the crowd. Four or five dozen versions of my face looked back at me. Smiles, nods, frowns of concentration predominated. Okay, not so bad. Bobs were not subtle. If our presentation had been less than interesting, we’d know it.

“Questions?” Bill said.

Bedlam erupted. Okay, really not bad.

Neil leaned closer to me. “Isn’t it nice to be important?”

“I’m having second thoughts, thanks.”

Bill pointed to someone, and the chaos quieted.

Thor stepped forward. “How confident are you of the alien power core?”

I opened my mouth to reply, but Neil jumped in. “It works fine. Just as dependable as one of our own. And a lot more powerful.”

I glared at him and whispered, “You lie like a log.”

“Shaddup, you.”

“How many pods do you think you can make?” Thor continued.

“We have enough material to build a pod for every human being alive,” Neil answered. “Just not enough time. In the 3.6 years subjective trip time, we figure we can make just over five million of them.”

Bill turned and spoke to someone. “Will, how many could you put together at your end?”

Riker stepped forward. “No more than a couple of million. We’re working in non-relativistic time, but on the other hand, we don’t have piles of refined metals just sitting there. We have to salvage every kilogram of metal, and the pickings are getting thinner. It’s starting to slow colony ship production, as a matter of fact.”

The conversation descended into comparisons of critical paths, differing ramp-up strategies, result domains, and other, even less interesting things. I eyed Neil, and he nodded. As casually as possible, we sidled away from the debate and toward the bar. No one noticed our departure.

I leaned against a rail with a beer in my hand, and grinned at Neil. “We’re important.”

“Yeah, when they notice we’re gone, I’ll concede. Meanwhile…” He raised his beer in a toast.

Gotta love moots.





34. Kidnapping



Bob

September 2224

Delta Eridani (Eden)

I was sitting in the sun with Buster, watching him casually work a piece of flint, when the Deltan came running up. He bent over, gasping for breath for a few moments, then straightened. “Archimedes has been grabbed. I think it was some guys from Caerleon. Must have been.”

I leaped to my feet and almost yelled at the runner, “Have you told Donald? Anyone else?”

He nodded, still gasping. “Yeah, Donald’s gathering some hunters.”

I looked over to see Buster silently gathering his bow and arrows. He didn’t say anything; didn’t look at me or at the runner. His fur was flat, his inner turmoil telegraphed by his ears, which were curled in rage. Someone was going to die today.

We hurried over to the hunters’ tree, where a group was forming. Donald waved at me as I came up.

“Well, Robert, it looks like you and Archimedes might have been right. There’s only one reason for them to grab him.”

I shook my head. “Two reasons, actually. If Fred is involved, he may also be trying to get a reaction from me. I’m pretty sure I hurt his feelings, last time we met.” I glanced at Buster, standing beside me. “If Fred’s involved, today is his final day of life, I think.”

Buster stared straight ahead, still not looking at anyone.

I’d set spy drones to searching for any large, fast-moving parties of Deltans. Reports were now starting to come in. I checked the heads-up. It showed two different groups, but only one was on a determined beeline for Caerleon. My bet would be on that one.

I instructed the drones to try for close-ups, and gave them Archimedes’ profile to identify. Then I turned to Donald. “Chances are they’re on the East Trail, or will be soon. We can cut straight through the Deep Copse to catch up.” I hoped Donald wouldn’t question me. I knew for a fact that was true, but I couldn’t explain how without blowing my cover.

Fortunately, Donald took my word for it and started giving orders. In moments, we were running toward the Deep Copse, a thick grove of especially tall, old trees. Paradoxically, because of the thickness of the trees, there was very little underbrush to slow us down. We made it through in minutes.

I held up my hand to stop the group and made a show of listening, then gestured up the trail. We took off at a sprint. It took less than a minute to catch up to the Caerleon group, who I knew had been having a problem with their captive grabbing every tree and branch he could reach. From my position, it looked like they’d solved the problem by beating Archimedes unconscious and then carrying him.

A low growl escaped my throat, and I hoisted my spear. The Caerleon party, hearing our approach, stopped and formed a defensive semicircle, spears pointing outwards.

Fred stepped forward, grinning his usual smug, nasty grin. “Hello, Robert. Robert’s lackies. I suggest you accept the inevitable. Your friend is going to be—”

Fred looked down at the arrow protruding from his chest. With a surprised expression, he fell to his knees, then collapsed sideways to the ground.

I turned to look at Buster.

“Dibs,” he said with a shrug.

Unfortunately, although I could understand and sympathize with Buster’s actions, the Caerleon gang might retaliate by harming Archimedes. I would not allow that, even if it meant revealing that the Bawbe was still watching. I called up a squad of busters and sent them to the nearby trees, standing by.

If at all possible, though, we would take these guys out the old-fashioned way.

The Caerleons were still going through surprise at the quick death, but a few heads had started to turn toward their prisoner. With a roar of anger, I charged the spear line. My friends followed, yelling battle-cries.

I would easily be the first to reach the defenders. But how to handle it? I could, of course, take a couple of spear wounds without slowing my android form. But running around with spears sticking out of me would be hard to explain. On the other hand, I didn’t want any of my friends to take a spear. I had less than ten meters to decide on a plan.

Instead of slowing down, I accelerated. As I came almost to the flint tips of their spears, I threw myself down and sideways. Half sliding, half rolling, I passed under the spear points before the Deltans could react. My tumbling body took out three of the front defenders, and knocked down a couple behind them.

With the sudden hole in the defensive line, the Caerleons were unable to hold off the attackers. The defenders tried to swivel to close the gap, but left themselves open to attack from the side. I heard growls and the smack of colliding bodies, as well as the more cringeworthy cries of people being impaled.

I couldn’t worry about it at the moment, though. A couple of the Caerleons seemed to have had exactly the thought I’d been concerned about. As I’d feared, they drew their flint blades and turned to Archimedes’ limp form.

I grabbed a spear that had been dropped and thrust it at the first enemy. At the last moment, I redirected the spear to what I hoped was a non-fatal attack. The spear passed through Deltan muscle and jabbed the Deltan behind him. I released the spear, leaving both Deltans howling with pain and surprise, grabbed the knife that one had just dropped, and drove it into the thigh of a third enemy.

With the quick removal of three of their number, the others backed away from Archimedes, fear written on their faces. I pulled my lips back as far as I could and did my best Hulk impression, roaring and gnashing my teeth.

Apparently, it was effective. One tripped while trying to backpedal and sat down abruptly, and the other two turned tail and fled.

I stood over Archimedes’ still form and spun around, snarling, looking for anyone within reach. At this point, if I had caught someone, I very probably would have done something impossible for a Deltan and blown my cover.

Not necessary, though. The battle was over. Three of ours were down. Eight of theirs were down, three of them obviously dead. Including Fred.

Buster and I exchanged silent looks, then we turned to Archimedes. I knelt and examined him. He was still breathing, although a faint liquid sound in his lungs concerned me. The beating looked to have been more enthusiastic than really necessary. Deltans had marvelous healing abilities—I hoped it would be enough, otherwise Archimedes might lose an eye. The teeth, at least, would grow back.

Very slowly and carefully, Buster and I lifted Archimedes and headed back to the village.

* * *

A week later, Archimedes was looking much better. He hadn’t lost the eye, although he was still complaining about blurry vision.

He sat with his granddaughter, Lisa, who went into fits of giggles watching her grandfather eating baby food. He’d be on that diet for a few more weeks, according to Belinda.

Donald sat in front of the fire, nursing a large hunk of jerky. He extended an arm, holding a knife out to me. I took the flint blade and examined it.

“Mm, yeah, not exactly up to Archimedes’ standards.”

“It’s crap,” Donald said. “It looks like you guys were right. We questioned a couple of the survivors, after the medicine woman was done with them. By the way, she thinks you’re an idiot for wasting resources healing enemies.”

I waved the comment away. “Once the fight is over, everyone bleeds the same color. And Annie is way more reasonable than Cruella ever was. She would have just told me to stuff it.”

Donald nodded. “Anyway, the knife is some of the best work coming out of Caerleon. So they have crap knives and crap spears, and are barely doing better with hunting than how my father says things were back at the old village. They’ve even started to get gorilloids sniffing around again.”

“And they blame us.”

Donald grinned at me. “I never said it made sense. I guess it’s our fault for having more skilled people and better tools and better hunting.”

“And more adults.” I grinned back. Then I grew serious. “But if this is the problem, it’s fixable. Just have some of their best and brightest come over and get Archimedes to train them.”

“I’m sure they’ve thought of it,” Buster cut in, as he came up and sat down. “But there’s been so much fighting, they probably think we’d just laugh at them.”

“And they don’t want to look weak.”

I rubbed the fur above my eyebrow, the Deltan equivalent of pinching the bridge of my nose. “Unbelievable. So, how do we broach the subject?”

Archimedes looked up from playing with Lisa. “We should just offer to teach a couple of their people.”

“The teaching thing didn’t work so well before,” I pointed out.

“They weren’t hungry before,” Archimedes answered. “I bet they’ll pay more attention now.”

We looked at each other around the fire. No one had to put it into words. It was worth a try.





35. Cities Victorious



Marcus

October 2215

Poseidon

A month after the uprising, things were finally settling down. But despite all my attempts to dodge, bob and weave, and otherwise avoid taking on a position of responsibility, I’d still somehow ended up as the Chairman Pro Tem. Of course, there was some logic to having the reins held by someone who was available twenty-four seven, never forgot anything, and couldn’t be bought or blackmailed.

Still, I was going to arrange elections as soon as possible.



The drone settled into New Thark’s docking bay and floated into a parking spot. The cargo bay doors opened and I stepped out. I took a moment to look around—most of the spots were taken, as people continued to move into the city.

I walked to the elevators at the end of the bay and got in with a half dozen random strangers. Interestingly, two hundred years later and twenty light years away, people still behaved the same in elevators as they did in Original Bob’s day. Everyone turned to face the doors, and ignored each other.

As the elevator rose to ground level, I surreptitiously examined the other passengers. No one paid me any particular attention. I was just another anonymous, random individual. It amazed me how good that felt.

I stepped out of the elevator and found myself outdoors, with a transport station to my left and a park to my right. I let the other passengers hurry to grab taxis first, while I took the time to look around. This was my first time in the new version-3 floating city. This model boasted two square kilometers of usable surface, divided about evenly between residences, businesses, and parkland.

The fibrex dome stretched over the city, ensuring a warm, dry environment, no matter the weather outside. Residents were scattered around, sitting on benches or on the grass, working away on their tablets or remote-controlling some piece of equipment, VR headset and gloves firmly in place.

Why the Council would have wanted to prevent this was beyond me. Some people just seemed to want to display their power by defining what others could or couldn’t do.

I shook my head, then turned and headed for the transport station. I grabbed the next available pod, spoke Kal’s address, and sat back as the pod accelerated into the underground track.

In less than two minutes, I exited the pod, followed the directions it had given me, and was standing at Kal’s front door.

* * *

We sat around the table, Kal, Denu, Gina, Vinnie, and myself, drinking beer and comparing war stories. The new government of Poseidon, such as it was.

Gina put up a list of names. “Here’s the Council members we’ve captured. Five out of seven. Based on comments from a couple of them, you might be right about the last two having escaped in subs.”

“So they might be hiding out on any of a hundred mats.” I smiled at her. “Or they might already be in the belly of the leviathan.”

Gina shrugged. “Yeah, no way to know. But they’re not like royalty. They won’t command a following of fanatically loyal subjects.”

“Right. We’ll keep an eye out, do patrols, but it’s not top of the priority list. What are you doing with the five you captured?”

“Four of them will go to trial for the hundred and fifty deaths of Thark citizens. The consensus seems to be a lifetime posting to the fish plant, or something equally smelly.”

“And Brennan?”

Gina sighed. “Honestly, Marcus, we don’t really have anything. We played with the idea of incarcerating him for life, or deporting him to another colony, or even back to Earth. All of those alternatives are a ton of effort and cost, and make no sense except as some form of retribution. And he’s not worth it. We’re considering just sticking him with the other four and being done with it.”

There were nods around the table. Fish plant labor was easy to automate, but the Council had used it as a punishment for dissidents and miscreants. The irony of hoisting them on their own petard was so overt that it needed no further words. Brennan deserved worse, but I agreed that he didn’t deserve the effort required to arrange something.

“And meanwhile,” I looked to one of my monitor windows in my heads-up, which showed the orbital autofactories in full swing. “Another dozen or so cities and we’ll have the entire population of Poseidon in the air.”

Gina grinned at me. “And then we’re gonna vote you out on your ear.”

“Can’t wait.”





36. Announcement



Riker

October 2227

Sol

Bedlam.

No, even that wasn’t a strong enough word. It reminded me of the first meetings of the UN, way back when. Everyone was attempting to talk at once. Half the people were hammering their Request buttons, the other half were ignoring them. The chairperson sat at her desk with her head in her hand.

I grinned into the camera. Technically, I still had the floor, so my mike was active. “Sooooo, want to hear more?”

The chaos cut off like a switch had been thrown.

“As I said, this vessel will hold all of the remaining population of Earth. Every last one. We will obviously still have to build stasis pods. However, Herschel and Neil, the two Bobs in charge of the Bellerophon, are also building pods in their cargo bay as they travel. Good news, they have all the material they could possibly need. Bad news, with relativistic time dilation, they’ll only have three and a half years to work with.”

Representative Misra requested and got the floor. “Could they slow slightly and enjoy a longer subjective time to work in?”

I smiled and nodded. Ms. Misra understood the mechanics very well. It made talking to her so much easier than most of these bozos. I grimaced for a moment at the unintended contempt in that thought.

“That’s correct. However, it would result in a longer transit time from our point of view. There’s still the Others to worry about. Their plans are a big unknown, but we’re going to assume we don’t have time for a leisurely flight plan. I’d rather get them here quickly, then we can make use of all that scrap in their hold.”

I shared out a list of tasks and milestones. Most of the UN delegates ignored it, but a few looked down and started reading.

“Once the Bellerophon gets here with her hull full of scrap metal, we can assign every single printer and AMI to the task of building more pods. Meanwhile, we need to make sure our shuttles are all in good working order. I’ve calculated that we can move about three hundred thousand people at a time, using the existing airworthy enclave shuttles and cargo vessels. I’d like to get that number up to a round million.”

I released the floor and nodded to the chairperson. Every Request light in the UN lit up.

Fun times.

Representative Hubert from the North African enclave took the floor. “Mr. Johansson, I am concerned that we will not have enough stasis pods for all of Earth when the ship, er, the Bellerophon arrives. Yet I note that you are still allocating resources to things like colony ships and shuttles. What about creating more printers, to increase the throughput? I’m not trying to tell you how to do your job, but have you considered what the most efficient schedule is?”

Hubert sat down and turned off his mike, giving up the floor.

I nodded an acknowledgement. I could have been offended, but I’d rather have the question asked and answered. “Representative Hubert, it is a good question, and well worth asking. And the answer is that I spend a considerable portion of my time considering all the alternatives. The problem is that, no matter what course you navigate, there is always a bottleneck. Whether it’s lack of printers to build everything, or lack of sufficient material, or lack of drones and roamers to assemble the parts into the end product—it’s always something. Shift your schedule and you simply shift the nature of the bottleneck. Printers, for instance, are the most complex thing that a printer can make, except for something biological. They take forever, and have a high defect rate because of the precision required. So it’s not as simple as just making more printers to enjoy the benefits of exponential growth. You give up considerable manufacturing opportunity while engaged in that particular task.”

I paused and looked around at the various windows. “Concentrate on shuttles and we may not have enough stasis pods come arrival day. Concentrate on stasis pods and we may not have a way to get people up to the carrier quickly enough. I’ve already decided to stop manufacturing colony ships. We’ve got enough returning ships, now, to keep a flow going, and we need the raw materials for shuttles and pods.”

I paused again, then turned off my mike and sat down. Immediately, a dozen request lights lit up. With a sigh, I realized I would be here for a while.





37. Court Battle



Howard

September 2220

Omicron2 Eridani

“How long do you expect this to last?” I whispered to Ms. Benning. I glanced across the courtroom where Bridget’s children sat with their lawyer, Gus Kistler.

“Actually, it’ll be over in an hour,” Benning replied. “In the end, it’s a really cut and dry situation. Bridget Brodeur’s last will is on file, and its veracity is not being questioned. They are trying for an ‘undue influence’ ruling, but since that’s usually about inheritances, it’s not likely to fly. Lastly, they’re trying for sympathy with the ‘laying our mother to rest’ gambit.”

She shuffled some papers. “What it’s really about is a delaying action. They’ve been trying to prevent it for long enough that something would happen, or we’d run out of money—” I snorted. Fat chance of that. “Or get tired of fighting, or we’d make a mistake…” Ms Benning turned to me. “They’ve thrown everything but the kitchen sink at us. It’s a good thing Mrs. Brodeur was wealthy.”

She sat back and sighed. “Anyway, Mr. Johansson, they’ve used up all their ammunition, and we’ve used up all of ours. Today, the judge will decide. Unless a miracle occurs for them, we will win.”

I looked over at Rosie, Lianne, and Howard. Howard looked ready to throw up. It seemed like a bit of an over-reaction, since my impression through all of this had been that he was being dragged along by the girls.

And speaking of, they didn’t look nearly as nervous as would be indicated by Ms. Benning’s confident remark. Perhaps their lawyer was stringing them along. But why? It wouldn’t increase his billing. And anyway, he didn’t look all that confident.

Then Rosie turned and looked at me, and my heart froze. I don’t think I’d ever seen the particular facial expression malicious triumph before, but trust me, it’s one of those expressions you’ll recognize the first time with one hundred percent certainty. What was going on? She couldn’t be expecting to win this case? And if not—

With a sinking feeling of panic, I remembered Dr. Onagi’s suspicions. I sent a text to Will, Bill, and Bob. One of them had to be free, and they were in the minority of Bobs that were guaranteed to not be travelling at relativistic speeds.

I’ll take care of it, came back a moment later from Bill. I breathed a sigh of relief, but my stomach refused to un-knot.

The judge came in, we did the all-rise thing, then sat. There was considerable noise from the surprisingly large number of spectators. Apparently this case had achieved significant notoriety. The judge banged his gavel several times and demanded quiet.

Judge Katz spent a long time summarizing the facts and pleadings of the case. Even though I was deeply emotionally involved, I still found my mind wandering. I had to respect people like Ms. Benning who could sit through this regularly without their foreheads slamming onto the desk.

Then, finally, the judge came to the punchline. “I must, in the end, uphold the right of the decedent to decide her own destiny.”

There were gasps and muttering around the courtroom. I half-expected Rosie to stand up and start screaming invective, but no. She just—huh. She just took out her phone and texted something.

And, at that moment, I knew that Dr. Onagi had been right.

* * *

We all filed out of the courtroom. Ms. Benning was shaking my hand, and her assistant was making a phone call, when Rosie strode up to me.

“You may think you’ve won, but you still won’t steal our mother from us.”

“Chrissake, Rosie, are you still on that narrative? There is no stealing. There never was any stealing. Ignoring for the moment the fact that it was your mother’s decision, you still have her. You still have the body to bury, you still have her memories. You lost nothing!”

“Just the same, you won’t get her. I’ve made sure of that.”

“You mean sabotaging the stasis pod at the hospital?” I raised my eyebrows in an expression of exaggerated inquiry, and she went white. “I’m sorry, Rosie, but if you can defy a court order, so can I. Bill sent in a drone with the scanner and did the deed while we were in court. Except that, unlike you, Bill would have respected the court’s decision if we’d lost.”

Rosie took a step back and her lips formed into a silent snarl. I shook my head. “Bill confirmed with me that a device embedded in the stasis pod damaged it and shut it down, just around the time you sent a text. There will be an investigation, of course. I’m pretty sure sabotage of hospital equipment is a crime of some kind. I’m willing to throw myself on the mercy of the court for my transgression. I have a feeling it’ll go worse for you.”

I gave Rosie a blank, cold look. “I knew your mother and father. I loved and respected them both. Right now, I can’t understand how you could be related to them.”

She opened her mouth to say something, and I turned and walked away.





38. Travelling



Herschel

September 2236

Interstellar Space

“I’m serious, Herschel, it’s not coming back up.” Neil’s voice took on a little bit of a whine when he got really frustrated. The sound set my teeth on edge, and it was one of the only times I didn’t want to be around him.

“Have you jim-jammed the frammistan?”

“Oh, funny guy. How about you hang up the comedy act for a second and give me a hand. And if you start clapping, I will busterize you.”

I chuckled and activated one of my inside drones. We kept a set of spares in bay 446, which was about as central as you could get in the Bellerophon. The drone flew out the open bay doors, into the ship’s main axial corridor. Five klicks of straight flight took less than a minute, then a right turn, and I was in the power room. “Room” was a funny word to use for an open area a quarter kilometer on a side, but we’d gotten used to thinking of the ship as normal sized and ourselves as bugs.

Neil had three drones and a dozen roamers swarming the power core’s control area. For some reason, when Neil got frustrated, he made the roamers tap their feet. I’d never asked if it was on purpose. I wasn’t sure I wanted to know.

“I’ve done everything!” he exclaimed as soon as he saw my drone. “It’s dead. Inert.”

“It works fine, he says. As dependable as one of our own, he says.”

“Fine, Herschel. Get it out of your system. Make fun. Then, when you’re done, maybe we can work on fixing this friggin’ thing!”

I considered milking it for a few more moments, but why get greedy? As sure as entropy, I’d have another chance sooner or later. “Neil, I can see from here that the anodes are saturated. You can do a bleed, which will take about an hour, or you can do a full restart in twenty minutes.”

“Oh, God, no.”

“I’ll help, okay? We can’t afford to be down like this all the time.”

I called up some more drones and roamers, and we started the long and finicky restart process. A bleed would take longer, but didn’t require a lot of effort, so it was Neil’s go-to response.

Once we had the roamers and drones set up, I turned to Neil. “Why don’t you have an AMI set up to monitor this stuff? It’s a freakin’ rote task, dude!”

“I know, I keep meaning to…”

“So, you’re doing things the hard way, because you’re too lazy to figure out how to do them the easy way? Neil, you are truly a putz.”

Neil grinned at me, unoffended. “A lazy putz, thank you very much. Okay, Hersch, point taken. I’ll get on it.”

I smiled, leaned back, and stretched. Just another damned day at the office.

* * *

The cargo vessels weren’t just big empty barns. In some ways, that would have been convenient, but it would have required us to build something to anchor our various projects. I imagined the Others went though some vaguely similar logic. The vessels were large cylinders, organized radially—a central corridor a hundred meters in diameter stretched from the nose to the tail of the ship. A huge cargo door at either end allowed entry and egress. Storage bays were arranged internally in rings around the central corridor, eight bays per ring by default, and each bay sported a massive double door. The A.I. controller and drive system were located in the middle ring, and the power core was at the rear of the craft.

Neil and I spent many hours touring the inside of the Bellerophon, trying to figure out the reasoning behind some of the design choices. In particular, Neil didn’t see why they needed bays at all.

“Look, Hersch, we’ve got the video from Mario’s discovery on Beta Hydri. The ingots they were producing weren’t that big. Like the size of a car. Why not just stack them in a big central area?”

“You just answered your own question, Neil. You really want ingots the size of Chevies banging around inside a spaceship?”

“Chrissake, dude, they tie them down…”

“To what? Now you need stanchions of some kind, at least. You can’t tie it down to one single connection point, either, because that’s a disaster waiting to happen. Besides, who says metal harvesting is the only thing they used these ships for?”

“Hmm, good point. They do have power connections in every bay. That would make sense if they used them for other stuff, like maybe manufacturing areas.”

“Yeah, uh…” I hesitated, and Neil looked over at me, curious. “Well, I have a theory, based on this ship…”

Neil made a rolling motion with his hand for me to continue.

“Look, Neil, we do our manufacturing out in space, because we don’t give a crap and it’s convenient. But given what we know of the Others and the way they huddle in their death asteroids—well, what if they’re an underground species? Maybe they’re deeply agoraphobic. Maybe they do all their manufacturing inside one of these things because if they had to supervise something outside, it would scare the crap out of them.”

Neil bobbed his head back and forth. “Not unreasonable. Total speculation, of course. Hey, you could always go ask them.” He grinned at me.

[Mover Plates are offline.]

“The hell?” We both looked up at Guppy. “What happened?” I asked.

[Plate AMIs have lost synchronization.]

Neil looked at me. “Third time this month. About ready to concede yet?”

“Crud.” I rubbed the bridge of my nose. “Okay, I give. Guppy, take them through restart, let me know when the drive is up again. And we’re going to make eight more plates and try to even out the field.”

The problem wasn’t really too few plates. Bill’s calculations had been right—24 plates would fly the Bellerophon, all things being equal. But all things were not equal. We had a couple of Bobs—us—constantly flying around in the ship under our own SURGE fields, moving and shifting mass around in the ship, and restarting the power core a couple of times a month. We were our own worst enemy. We needed some wiggle room, in the form of a little extra field strength to absorb the glitches.

I watched Neil do the I told you so dance for a few moments. “When you’re done being an ass, let’s see where we can set this up. Maybe a free bay toward the front.”

Neil grunted. “You know, there was a time, when we were pondscum, and we just flew around a lot and minded our own business.”

“Ah, the good old days,” I replied. “When things were simpler, kids were more respectful, and we had to walk to school through six feet of snow.”

“Barefoot.”

“Uphill.”

“Both ways.”





39. Retirement



Marcus

February 2218

Poseidon

I sat in a lawn chair, soaking in the warm afternoon sun. I hardly ever thought about the fact that I was inhabiting an android any more. Howard and Bob kept improving the model, and Bill seemed happy with the delegation of responsibility. Couldn’t really blame him, I supposed. He had other things on his mind.

Around me, children played, couples walked hand-in-hand, and people did their jobs either through tablets or tele-presence. If this wasn’t utopia, I’d be damned if I could figure out what was missing.

Especially for me. Rather than take back control of the autofactories after the revolution, I’d aggressively created the means for the population of Poseidon to take over the responsibility. Now, three years later, I had absolutely no duties in this system.

As promised, Gina had me voted out on my ear. To her chagrin, she found herself voted in as Chairperson. The new Council was still arguing about what to put in as a permanent government, but that was certainly nothing new.

I got up and walked along the path toward the nearest food kiosk. That particular lawn chair might or might not be occupied if I returned, but there’d be another. Or I could just park my butt on the grass.

The problem I had run into was perhaps not totally unexpected. Bob had always been a driven, workaholic personality. Great for when you were defending the galaxy from the rampaging hordes; maybe not so good when you’d just arranged to have yourself made redundant.

Poseidon society had been fundamentally changed, and the change looked to be permanent. Fewer and fewer people were living on the mats, or even working on them for longer than necessary. The floating cities—the aquatic ones, that is—were being converted entirely to industrial use. Humans were now an aerial species on this world.

I grabbed a chocolate shake—nothing had ever been invented or discovered that beat chocolate—and headed over to the edge of the city. Looking down through the dome, I could see wispy clouds, drifting mats, sparkling blue water right out to the horizon, and the occasional huge shadowy silhouette gliding just under the surface. The krakens, hydrae, and leviathans weren’t the only large predators, or even the biggest. We kept discovering new beasties, often the hard way. There wasn’t really a concerted effort, yet, to catalog everything under the surface. Maybe because of the danger.

“So, how’s life as a retiree?”

I turned to find Kal grinning at me.

“Huh. I’m pretty sure I had my location turned off. How’d you find me?”

Kal rolled his eyes. “C’mon, Marcus. You’re kind of famous. There’ve been three social media posts with your image in the last fifteen minutes. If you want anonymity, you’re going to have to modify that mug of yours.”

I nodded and turned back to the dome wall. “Or disappear entirely.”

“What’s going on, Marcus?” Kal stepped closer, frowning.

“Oh, hey, that came out more dramatic than intended.” I gave Kal an apologetic smile and waved at the view. “I’m just thinking about a new career. Oceanography.”

Kal raised an eyebrow.

“I think there’s an opportunity here. You’ve seen videos of Garfield’s pterosaur-like android? Bob-1 has definitely gone non-human. Why even stick to bipedal?”

Kal looked out at the ocean below. “You mean…”

“I wonder how an android dolphin would fare on this world.”





40. Recovery



Bob

January 2225

Delta Eridani

I paused to stretch, then pulled a tent flap aside and peeked outside. Wow. Good day to stay indoors. The rain, in drops almost as big as marbles in this heavy atmosphere, came in more horizontally than otherwise.

These tropical storms were surprisingly rare in this part of Eden, fortunately. I wondered how the Deltans would have handled them before my introduction of tents. Probably huddled under blankets made from skins. I remembered that storm they’d endured during the exodus from the old village. That hadn’t been as bad as this, but it had still put me onto the tent idea.

I glanced around the village. No one was in sight, not surprisingly. Behind me, I heard stirring.

“Are you going to keep that thing open forever? You’re letting the cold in.”

I grunted and released the flap. Belinda wasn’t big on cold.

I returned to my spot, lay down, and put my hands behind my head. Archimedes was awake, turning a piece of flint in his hands. I could see that it was the spear-head from Fred’s spear.

Archimedes looked in my direction. “I’ve got an idea for getting the flint teaching thing going.” He waved the spear-head like a wand. “It’s worth it if it ends the fighting.”

“Sure, Archimedes. I’ve got your back, whatever you want to do.”

“Good. I’ll have to make a half-dozen or so spear-heads and knife blades, first. Belinda won’t let me work inside, so I hope this storm ends soon.”

“My bones tell me it’ll clear up around noon.” I twisted my ears in amusement, and Archimedes returned the expression.

I had earned a reputation as an accurate forecaster of weather, crediting aches in my bones for being able to feel the change. In fact, I simply looked down from orbit at the prevailing weather patterns. Sure, it was cheating. So what?



The storm blew itself out by early afternoon, so we headed out to Archimedes’ favorite flint-working spot. I was impressed by the amount of flint flakes lying discarded on the ground. Someone pushed them into a pile occasionally, when they started to become an irritant, so there was an even larger heap of flakes a few feet away. Children would often pick through the pile, looking for flakes that could be made into arrow-heads. Archimedes didn’t mind—he made more than enough product to trade for everything he and his family could want.

Archimedes endured a coughing fit as he sat down. He still hadn’t completely recovered from the kidnapping. I waited, ready to go back for water if he needed it.

Over the course of the afternoon, Archimedes roughed out a dozen blanks. I took the opportunity to go on a quick hunting trip, during which I checked surveillance for any Caerleon activity. I found nothing, which led me to hope that the incident had cooled any desire by the other village to take us on again.

I dropped off a turkey-equivalent with Belinda, received a smile in return, and returned to Archimedes’ work area.

“I’ll be a few days getting these ready, Robert,” he said to me as I sat down. “Then we have to figure out how to offer them without getting killed.”

“Sooner the better, buddy. I’ll talk to Donald.”

Archimedes resumed his work, and I settled back to enjoy the sunshine.





41. Resurrection



Howard

October 2220

HIP 14101

I reached out, for the umpteenth time, to flip the switch. And pulled my hand back, yet again. Oh, my freakin’ God, what was wrong with me? I had Bridget’s scan—finally, after months of court battles. I had a matrix and a ship built for her. Her VR was set up, her firewall was set up, I had accounts set up for her on BobNet…

What the hell?

In desperation, I sent a text off to Bill. Am I doing the right thing?

The answer came back almost immediately. Oh, hell, no.

Well, nothing like a little bit of support from your friends. Chuckling, I flipped the switch.

Bridget appeared in the middle of my VR—twenty-eight years old, thick red hair, dimples, lab coat—just like the first day I’d met her.

I stared, slack-jawed. I couldn’t help it. I was completely, utterly, frozen.

Bridget turned a full circle, then smiled uncertainly at me. “Howard?”

I wordlessly got up, rushed to her, and wrapped her in my arms. She hugged me, put her head on my shoulder, and we simply existed, for what could have been forever.

Finally, she stepped back and looked at me searchingly. “I guess this means I’m dead?”

“Original Bridget is dead. You are very much alive.”

“Okay, Howard, I’ll toe the official line. I know you’ve always been sensitive about the difference.”

“It’s important to get an image of yourself as a unique person, Bridge. You aren’t just a copy. You’re you, and you’ll become more you as time goes on.”

I took her hand and led her to the couch. I had copied the couch from her apartment, in the hope that it would reassure her. She looked at it and chuckled, no doubt fully aware of my intent.

“We’ve got hundreds of Bobs now. Every one of us is different. Some are a little different, some are a lot. There’s no feeling of us just being ‘Bob clones’. And you aren’t just a ‘Bridget clone’.”

Bridget’s lips pressed together for a moment. Then she looked me in the eyes. “Got it. If I believe my Catholic upbringing, Original Bridget is now in either Heaven or Hell. You know the Catholic Church was never able to come up with a coherent policy on replicants, right?”

I chuckled. “They didn’t have a whole lot of time, before Armageddon distracted everyone.”

Bridget blew out a deep breath and looked around. “What happened to the beach?”

“I can bring that back if you want. But this is my normal indoor VR. I’ve kind of settled on the default Bob library slash living room.”

“Could we, please? I never actually experienced the ocean shore in real life on Earth.”

I nodded, and the VR changed to my tropical paradise. A warm breeze ruffled our clothing, gulls squawked in the distance, and Jeeves stood at attention with a couple of drinks with little umbrellas.

Bridget giggled. She looked around, sighed, then patted the couch. “This could probably go.”

“Your wish is my command.”

The couch was replaced with a couple of comfortable lawn chairs—not the plasticky ones with cross-ways straps, but the good ones, with a fitted cushion. No geese here to worry about.

Bridget lay back in the chair and took a deep breath. “Okay, this is not bad. I might still have a panic attack at some point, but then maybe not. So, let’s bring me up to date. I died?”

“Yes.” I hesitated, looking at her. “Heart failure. You hadn’t told me that you’d changed your will. Apparently it was a surprise to a lot of people.”

She looked at me intently. “How did it go over with the children?”

I rolled my eyes. “Good thing you set aside that defense fund. I’ve got all the court documents and such, still. You can look them over whenever you want. Suffice it to say, though, that we are no longer on speaking terms.”

Bridget looked down with an expression of deep sadness. “I guess I’m probably not going to be their favorite person, either. Nevertheless, I should make the attempt.”

“Start with Howie.”

She nodded, thoughtfully, then looked around. “Um, so what do I do?”

“Oh, boy. I guess we should start with lessons. Replicant VR 101.”

* * *

I received a text from Bridget, indicating that she was finished with her phone calls. I popped into her VR right away, to find her sitting on her couch and quietly crying. I sat down beside her and without saying a word, took her hand.

She took a few more milliseconds, then smiled at me through the tears. “I have to admit, I love that you didn’t include runny noses in the VR world.”

“Look, there’s a limit to even our obsessive realism.” I grinned at her. “We also don’t have mosquitoes. That by itself is worth the price of admission.” I lost the grin and looked into her eyes. “So, want to talk about it?”

Bridget sighed and sat back into the couch. I noted in passing that it was the same couch as she’d had in her real apartment, the one I’d used when I brought her back. The VR was, in fact, a mostly faithful copy of her former home, except for the addition of a bigger sitting room area, and a bay window with a sun-filled view of the Vulcan landscape.

“I talked to Howie,” she said. Her lip quivered for a moment. “He was distant, but seemed embarrassed about it. I think he’s caught between a rock and a hard place, wanting to accept me, but knowing that Rosie would never forgive him.”

“Um.” I said. I figured that would be safe.

Bridget smiled sadly. “Rosie was always difficult. She knows what she wants, and isn’t interested in differing opinions. Or concerned about damage from trying to get her way.”

“Be patient, Bridge. Howie will come around. Out of curiosity, if nothing else. I can put him onto my relatives as well. Give him a more positive viewpoint on replicants as family.”

Bridget nodded and wiped her eyes. Then she looked at her hands with a quizzical expression. “I suppose I could really just alter the VR to clean myself up, couldn’t I?”

“Yes, but don’t. If you start getting in the habit of shortcutting things, you end up just floating around the room like Dracula. The VR helps us remain grounded.” I stopped and thought for a second. “Although now, with the androids and all, it might not be as important.”

Bridget stood up. She wandered slowly around her VR, occasionally picking up objects and examining them. She ended up at the bay window, looking out at the Vulcan forest in the distance. The sun was setting, and long shadows stretched across the foreground.

She gazed out at the landscape for a few moments, then raised a hand and made a small gesture. The Vulcan landscape changed into an aerial view of the Odin cloudscape. Blimps floated in the distance, moving in small groups.

“That’s from the videos I took,” I said, pleased. I walked over to stand beside her.

Bridget turned to me and returned my smile. “Please don’t be insulted, Howard, but it was the chance to study the Odin lifeforms that turned me around on the replication question.”

“Hah-HAH!” I replied. “My evil plan is working like a ch—Ow!”

“Just remember you can still feel my wrath, wise guy.” She grinned as I rubbed my shoulder. “Now, can we see about a field trip?”

“Yesss, precious, just don’t hurts us again.”

“Oh, Howard!”

Well, I’d wanted a family.





42. Results Negative



Bill

February 2228

82 Eridani

I’d received a report from Mack, so I popped into his VR to discuss it.

“Hey, Bill. Pull up a rock.” Mack waved a hand at a very comfortable-looking overstuffed easy chair, and I took the invitation.

“I read your report, Mack. Not very encouraging.”

“You mean the Medeiros part. Yeah, we’ve scanned this entire system right out to the Oort. Nada. In fact, I did a second scan, staggered in relation to the first one, in case something was hiding in a weak scan zone or something. Still nada.”

“What are the chances that what we saw with Medeiros was all there was?” I doubted that, myself, but wanted confirmation that my thinking was reasonable.

“Can’t see it, Bill. Those busters, and those missiles, had to come from somewhere. You saw that I talked it over with Calvin, right? ‘No damned way’ were his exact words.”

“Nor could he have hauled all those busters, missiles, and roamers all the way from Alpha Centauri.” I stared into space, considering. “Mind you, he couldn’t have brought them in from a nearby system, either, at least not in one trip.”

Mack nodded and rubbed his chin. “So, either he took two trips, or he had help, or he’s building them locally.”

“Maybe you need to go out farther on the scan.”

“Or… Bill, something I’ve been thinking about. We use the cloaking for busters and bombs, and that’s basically what Medeiros has been using it for. But what if he got the bright idea of cloaking an entire autofactory?”

I could feel my eyebrows going up. “Oh, that would be bad. Then he could be in this system, and we’d have to hit him with a focused pulse to even have a hope of detecting him.”

Mack sighed and sat back in his chair. He looked up at the ceiling, not speaking, for almost a half-second. “On the other hand, I could be invoking imaginary dangers, here. We are completely in the dark on this one.”

“You’re up to strength, now, right?”

“More or less.” Mack waved a hand dismissively. “We’ve got printers, we’ve got resources, I’m building a new cohort, I have busters to spare… But it looks like I’m going to have to mobilize a system-wide defense.”

“There’s a lot of that going around, these days, Mack. Look, once you have your cohort up and running, start on more surveillance drones. Give them both long-range and focused scanning capability. I know the chance of hitting something at random with a focused scan is low, but it’s not zero.”

Mack nodded. I stood, gave him a wave, and popped out.

Between the Others and Medeiros, life was just way too interesting.





43. Course Correction



Icarus

March 2240

Interstellar Space

“I am coming up on Epsilon Indi, Dae. From here, it’s a quarter circle. How’s your flight path?”

Daedalus’ response came immediately. “Checking…”

I waited for what seemed forever, but was probably a few milliseconds. This was the critical point in our approach. From this point on, we’d each describe a nice, smooth arc, terminating at GL 877. But timing became increasingly critical, now.

“I’m right on the money, buddy. Tau is correct, everything’s in the green.”

“Excellent,” I responded. “Let’s go kick some Others butt.”





44. Debut



Howard

December 2220

Odin

We flew effortlessly through the Odin skies, our wings beating just fast enough to maintain momentum. The manta android bodies seemed to be fooling the local wildlife—prey animals bolted, larger animals circled their young or simply ignored us. Ahead, a flock of blimps moved lazily through a krill field, grazing.

They’ll keep an eye on us, but shouldn’t otherwise alter their behavior as long as we don’t start chasing the juveniles, Bridget messaged to me.

Got it. Observe, but don’t snack.

Hah hah. Funny man.

In typical engineering fashion, I’d been content to build drones and observe from afar. Bridget, the moment she’d heard about Bob’s Charlie android that emulated a Deltan, and Marcus’ experiments with aquatic versions, had suggested we try something similar.

The mantas were a mid-level pack predator, shaped generally like the eponymous Earth fish. As with all Odin life, they contained a hydrogen sac to maintain neutral buoyancy. I had wanted to use helium instead for the androids, but the heavier construction created enough issues without using the less buoyant alternative.

We caught up to the flock of blimps. These were the huge animals that I’d spotted on my first deep dive into Odin’s atmosphere. They filled a niche similar to baleen whales, feeding on the plentiful small life that seemed to fill the air. We began to circle them, and each blimp kept a huge eye on a stalk pointed our way.

Are you recording?

Yes, dear.

Her response was a LOL and a heart emoji.

[Reminder: Moot starts soon.]

Whoops. I messaged Bridget, and she reluctantly agreed to pack it in for the day. We set our androids to autonomous station keeping. They would fly a slow, large circle, avoiding contact with other animals, until we needed them again.

We popped back into my VR. As usual after a manta session, Bridget’s face was flushed and she wore an ecstatic expression.

“Are you sure you’re up for this? We can still put it off.”

Bridget lost her smile. “I know, Howard, but I feel like I’m starting to become phobic about it. I have to come out in public sooner or later.”

“All right. Take a deep breath…” I took her hand, smiled reassuringly—I hoped—and we popped into the moot VR.



It could have passed for a photograph instead of a live action scene. Almost a hundred versions of my face stared back at us, eyes wide, mouths in the identical oh shape. No movement, no sound. Even the Jeeves’ had stopped to stare.

The tableau held for a couple of milliseconds. Then I leaned close to Bridget and stage-whispered, “Don’t worry, they’re more scared of you than you are of them. Just don’t make eye contact.”

The room broke up in laughter, and Bobs began coming over to say hi. It was starting to look like we’d be mobbed—well, Bridget would be mobbed; I might as well have been lint—but I’d carefully timed our entrance. At that moment, Bill gave the blaat from his air horn that meant the meeting was starting. Bobs turned to face Bill, and Bridget exhaled a sigh of relief.

We maneuvered ourselves to the back to get a couple of beers and watch the moot without being too much of a distraction. A short, trim man with thick dark hair walked over and said hello in an Australian accent.

I nodded to him and turned to Bridget. “Bridget, this is Henry Roberts. He’s from the Australian probe that Linus found in Epsilon Indi. Henry, Bridget.”

Bridget made a small show of looking around, and said, “Henry, I only see the one of you. Are you not replicating?”

Henry shook his head emphatically. “No way, ma’am. Since Linus rebuilt my matrix, I don’t feel any need for more of me. Nor to explore the universe, particularly. Hasn’t really gone that well for the Bobs, so far.”

“Come on, Henry, just the one creepy marauding alien species. That’s pretty good, overall.” I smiled at him.

Henry smirked back, then turned to Bridget. “What about you? Planning to replicate?”

Bridget rolled her eyes. “I understand why that was the original plan with the HEAVEN project, but the whole concept just gives me the shakes.” She looked at me for a moment. “I don’t understand how the Bobs are comfortable with it. It may be related to Original Bob’s humanistic philosophy.”

I cut in. “You’re probably right about the humanism, but to say we’re comfortable with it is a slight exaggeration. If not for the Others, and the issue with Earth, I bet there’d be only a few dozen of us.”

Both Bridget and Henry nodded thoughtfully. Henry replied, “And since you have that covered, I guess we’re good? I haven’t felt any pressure to contribute copies.”

“We’re resource-constrained, Henry. We can only build so many ships per year. Whether they’re Bobs or Henrys or Bridgets doesn’t matter. Might as well stick with the current system. At least the new clones come out knowing the full story.”

Bridget smiled at me before turning back to Henry. “So what are you going to do with yourself to keep busy?”

Henry looked surprised for a moment, then grinned. “To tell the truth, Bridget, I’m on my way to Omicron2 Eridani right now. I’m going to get an android body made, land on Romulus or Vulcan, and build a sailboat. Then I’ll spend a decade or two sailing the whole planet.”

“In fact,” he added after a moment’s thought, “I think I’ll try to sail every ocean of every planet in the human sphere. Chances are I’ll never catch up.”

I laughed and nodded my head in Bridget’s direction. “And she is going to catalog every species on every planet in the human sphere.”

“Damn betcha. What’s it to ya?” Bridget glared at me in challenge.

Henry chuckled. “Well, then, I expect I’ll run into you from time to time.”

Bridget responded with her nuclear-powered laugh, and Henry’s eyes widened slightly.

Yeah, she affects people like that. I’d made sure to preserve Bridget’s mannerisms as faithfully as possible. Henry’s reaction showed that the laugh was as effective in VR as it had been in real life. I frowned for a moment. She didn’t laugh as much as she used to, though. I wondered if that was because of replicant variations, or her recent experiences.

“Er, um, have you used one of the human androids yet?” Henry was making a visible effort to get himself back on an even keel.

Bridget shook her head and looked at me. “Howard’s been trying to get me to try it. I think I’m just going to take it slow. And I’m worried about running into my children.”

“But she’s okay flying an alien predator around on a gas giant.” I winked at her, and she grinned back.

Henry chuckled, then turned to face the front as Bill finished his opening speech. First item on the agenda was always the Others, Preparation For and Status Of. No one wanted to miss anything.

Bill’s summary was short and to the point. The harvesting of Delta Pavonis continued, the Bobs still didn’t have any way of stopping it, and no one had a plan.

Outstanding.





45. Pav Arrival



Jacques

May 2247

HIP 84051

I settled into an orbit around HIP 84051-2. It was a young planet of a young star, according to the survey. Native plant life hadn’t reached the angiosperm stage, and animal life hadn’t figured out endothermia yet. I hoped that Phineas and Ferb had managed to pick up a lot of genetic samples on Pav before the Others arrived. According to updates from Bill over the last few decades, re-creating plants and animals from samples was getting a lot easier. Of course, that comment was based on Earth life, with which we were very familiar. Extraterrestrial stuff would take some more work.

Mind you, we didn’t have to decant the Pav right away. Life forms didn’t suffer degradation in a stasis pod. We could take our time, figure out the Pav biology, get the process working, then wake up the refugees. I’d like that.

I checked the notes on HIP 84051. The Bob that explored and reported this system was named Steve. There was no indication where his name came from. Maybe Steve Dallas from Bloom County? As good a guess as any. It wasn’t worth pinging him just to ask, even assuming he was connected to BobNet at the moment.

I spent a month going over his notes while I waited for Phineas and Ferb to arrive. Steve went into considerable detail about climate, ecology, geology and such. He seemed to be a bit of a keener.

Despite the fact that I was in a new star system, I found myself just going through the motions. I had no energy, no enthusiasm. It took me a while to realize what was wrong. I finally figured out that there was no joy here. This wasn’t expansion. This wasn’t a new colony, whether for humans or, in this case, Pav. This was being chased out—this was fleeing from a home that had been perfectly suited to them, to take refuge somewhere else that was nothing more than the best alternative available.

The thought was dangerously depressing. I had to get out of this funk or I’d be no good to anyone.

I waited until the colony ships were close enough, then popped in to visit.

“Hi, Phineas.”

“Hello, Jacques. Pull up a chair. Survey okay?”

I settled into an overstuffed easy chair. “No surprises. Not the greatest. Kind of a Devonian level of ecosystem. They can live there…”

“Right.” Phineas looked at me searchingly. “You’ve got a bit of the Dickie Downer thing going, I think.”

I laughed. “Guilty as charged. There’s nothing about this whole situation that doesn’t suck donkey balls. I guess it’s just gotten to me.”

“Mmm. Well, I have been following Bill’s blog on Somatic Regeneration from Genetic Material—”

“Wow, that’s really good, Phineas. I could hear the capitals.”

“Nyuk nyuk. Anyway, Ferb and I batted it back and forth during the voyage, and we took a look at the samples we have in stasis, and we think we could get Bill’s techniques to work on Pav biology.”

“Huh. Okay, so we hold off on decanting them for a while so you can try out your ideas?”

“I think so. The delay won’t harm them, and I’d like to hand them something a little better than this raw planet.”

I nodded. “Good. Let’s do that.”

I already felt better.





46. City



Howard

June 2221

Odin

Bridget found me lounging in my office, feet up on my desk, gazing abstractedly at a hologram floating in the air.

“What’s that?” She pointed at the image.

“You know how Marcus created those flying cities on Poseidon?”

“Mmm, hmm,” Bridget replied, “and a thorough shit-storm along with them. I read blogs, too.”

I grinned at her. “Well, it got me thinking. Odin is this huge freakin’ planet, and if you’re going to go all floating-city, why not here?”

“Okay. Is that his design?”

“No.” I gestured at the hologram. “I don’t need SURGE coils to stay afloat. Turns out normal Earth-pressure air in an enclosed bubble will float in Odin’s atmosphere, at the 1.5 bars level. I’ve designed the city within a prolate spheroid, which will be very stable, and more than strong enough with carbon-fiber reinforced materials.”

“Sure, but who’s going to live there?”

“Well, I was thinking maybe us.”

Bridget raised an eyebrow at me. “Uh, Howard, are you forgetting what VR stands for?”

“No, dear.” I grinned at her as she stuck her tongue out. “I’m thinking android bodies. Our very own city in the clouds. Don’t say I never give you anything.”

“You, sir, have far too much time on your hands.”

I nodded, then lost my smile. “Seriously, though, Bridget, this whole thing with the Others—it’s not out of the question that we might end up having to hide human colonies in gas giants, to avoid getting wiped out.”

“The Bobs are really concerned about this species, aren’t they?” Bridget’s eyes showed her concern.

“Yeah, Bridge, Delta Pavonis really kicked the stuffing out of us. I feel kind of bad that I’m not more involved in the war effort. I guess this is my contribution.”

“So we’d be the beta testers.” Bridget sat down at my desk and examined the model more closely.

“Yep. And of course we can’t really be hurt if things go bad.”

Bridget poked a finger at the model and turned it this way and that. She examined it in silence for several milliseconds. Then she turned to me. “And a front-row seat to watch Odin life in action. Okay, Howard. You’ve been wanting to get me involved in a printing project. Let’s see what we can do.”





47. Foreboding



Riker

December 2240

Sol

Bill stared into space, slowly twirling the glass of whiskey in his hand. I’d managed to tempt him with a scan of one of the more recent vintages from Vulcan.

Funny, Vulcan had become the acknowledged expert in alcoholic products, real or VR. Howard’s company—well, the Brodeur family’s company—was even financing construction of some AMI-controlled starships to start trade routes between systems. I privately thought that might be a little premature, but I guess life goes on, even with the threat of an alien menace. In any case, the project gave people something positive to focus on, so what the hell.

“It’s not bad,” Bill said. “Original Bob would have approved. And he’d have slowly gotten tanked without realizing it. I think this would sneak up on you.”

I grinned at the image. “Yeah, pretty sure.” I hesitated, and shifted in my chair.

Bill saw the movement and raised an eyebrow. “Okay, so this isn’t just a social call. I sort of assumed, anyway. What’s up, Will?”

“There’s been no activity from the Others, Bill. Nothing. No sorties, no attacks, no nothing. It smells.”

“Granted. But how much of that is just us being on edge?”

“Um. I’m wondering if a quick examination of GL 877 might be in order.” I tried to keep my voice casual, but the expression on Bill’s face showed me I’d pretty much failed.

“I get it, Will. But we have to balance any knowledge we might gain against the possibility of them capturing some of our tech. They haven’t tried again with the monitor drones in the Oort, but if we sent something in-system…”

I’d been giving this some serious thought, so Bill’s objection wasn’t really a surprise. And I had my answer ready. “They can’t capture our tech if we don’t send any new tech inbound. I’m suggesting an incursion using only common tech. SURGE, level 1 SUDDAR, so on. No SCUT, no cloaking.”

Bill’s eyebrows rose on his forehead. “Okay, how will that work?”

I popped up some schematics. “We disguise the probes in an asteroid-like coating. It’ll block causal SUDDAR pings, and fool radar and visual inspections. Just another piece of space junk, floating through the system. The units will store their observations for retrieval on the way out, or they’ll transmit everything and self-destruct if they see anything approaching.”

“They?”

“As many as we can build. Send them in at all kinds of angles and speeds.”

Bill stared into space, silent, for several milliseconds. “It does actually sound like a no-downside kind of plan. What the hell, let’s talk to Mario. It’s up to him, in the end, but I bet he’ll go for it.”

* * *

“I can do that.” Mario nodded in thought for a moment, then looked at us. “I’ve got autofactories about a quarter-light-year out, ready to pump out more replacement monitor drones if the Others get uppity again. Something like what you describe would be dead easy.” He rubbed his chin. “Little bit of a pain to get everything into position, but we’ve got the time, I guess. If the Others suddenly make an appearance, you’ll have your answer anyway.”

I nodded in agreement. “Good. And, let’s face it, we might see nothing but more Dyson Sphere construction, but if we find a massive fleet of death asteroids and cargo vessels being prepped, I’d kind of like for it not to be a surprise.”

Mario grinned at me. “Got it. I’ll get started.”





48. Pav Decanting



Jacques

July 2256

HIP 84051

Residences for twenty thousand Pav. Check. Big honkin’ fence to keep out the native wildlife. Check. Farms, with Pav crops already starting to grow. Check. Pav farm animals, taking first steps on wobbly new legs. Check.

Okay, this wasn’t half bad. We’d gone a little overboard with the residences. Probably some displaced guilt in operation. But it looked like we were ready.

Phineas and Ferb sat, holding coffees, waiting for me to open the conversation. For some reason, I found myself reluctant. Up to this point, we’d been able to avoid really dealing with the whole Pav thing. Analyzing their biology was fun and interesting, and building a colony site was just the adult version of Lego.

But now, we’d be waking up the last twenty thousand members of an all-but-extinct species. And, of course, dealing with their questions, accusations, and our feelings of guilt over the whole Delta Pavonis thing.

I sighed and put my coffee down on the side-table. “Okay, guys. Enough procrastination.” I gestured to Phineas. “You first.”

Phineas gave me a crooked grin, acknowledging the awkwardness. “We’ve got everything ready. The site is ready, crops are growing, animals are doing what animals do. We’ve got drones doing most of the maintenance labor, but we’ll either have to step in with androids or start waking Pav, pretty soon.”

“Right. This colony isn’t going to run itself.” I looked at Ferb. “We’ll be offloading your colonists first. Any issues?”

Ferb shook his head in reply. “No, I’m completely ready. More than. I want to get heading for Sol as soon as possible. Maybe we can get a load of humans out of there before the Others show up.”

“Assuming they do.”

Ferb rolled his eyes. “Jeez, Phineas, grow a brain.”

Phineas shrugged without further comment.

“Anyway,” I said, trying to forestall what had become an ongoing argument, “You’ll be able to unload all your colonists. Three days, right?”

Ferb nodded. “Yeah, we’ll take our time, so we don’t have too many awake-but-helpless Pav sitting around at any time. After the first load, the Pav can explain the situation to each new batch.”

“Urgh.” I dropped my head into my hand and massaged my forehead for a few moments. “I’m not looking forward to that, either. Even with Hazjiar to help, it’s going to be chaos. Even more than normal Pav chaos.”

* * *

We woke Hazjiar and the other seven Pav that Bill and I had originally spoken to. They were calmer this time, possibly helped by the food we’d decanted for the occasion.

The destruction of the meal complete, Hazjiar looked up in the general direction of the wall monitor. “What now?”



Phineas, Ferb, and I exchanged glances. “Well, here goes nothing.”



I replied through the wall monitor. “I’m going to come in person to discuss next steps with you. I want you to be prepared.”

All eight Pav went into alert posture, heads swiveling in all directions.

“Is there danger?” Hazjiar asked.

“No. I just think it’s time we met face to face.”



I gave the guys a lopsided grin. “I just hope they’re not still hungry.”

It took only moments to enter the android and go through startup checks. I undraped myself from the support rack and walked to the door. A short walk down the hallway, and I stood outside the room containing the revived Pavs. I took a deep breath, muttered, “Showtime,” and signaled the door to open.

As I entered the room, the Pav retreated en masse to the far corner. The tableau held for several seconds, a seeming human being at one end, and a pack of six-foot-tall meerkats standing at alert at the other. I’d discussed it with Bill and we’d decided that showing ourselves as alien would be better than trying to pass off a Pav form. Just the same, a certain amount of awkwardness seemed reasonable.

I glanced at them, but avoided a steady stare, which could be interpreted as aggressive. Instead, I walked to the long table and sat down on the bench.

“Good day,” I said to the group. “I’m Jacques. Once again, I’m sorry to be meeting you in these circumstances.”

There was no movement for several seconds, then Hazjiar sidled over and sat on the other side of the table. After a brief silence, she gestured to me. “Why did you not show yourselves, last time?”

“Um…” There was no reason for Hazjiar to know that I was not flesh and blood. Why complicate things? “We didn’t want to alarm or distract you unnecessarily. It was a spur of the moment decision.”

She nodded, apparently satisfied. The other seven Pav began to tentatively move toward the table. I ignored them, hoping they would take it as encouragement.

“What shall we discuss?” Hazjiar asked.

I carefully avoided smiling. To the Pav, that would be a challenge. “Your new home is ready for you. We have twenty thousand of your people in stasis, and I’d like to discuss plans for awakening them.”

Hazjiar nodded again, and visibly settled herself more comfortably on her seat. As a City Councilor by profession, administrative considerations were her job, and the familiar ground seemed to reassure her.

“Very well, Jock, what do we have to work with?”

* * *

Hazjiar swept her gaze over the fields, where the first kee crops, a sort of above-ground potato, were just beginning to ripen. We sat on the patio of Hazjiar’s home, while three Pav soldiers fingered their weapons and eyed me suspiciously. I smiled to myself at their expressions and body language, careful not to let it reach the android’s face.

The Pav were constantly perplexed by our behavior, but seemed willing to put it down to our alien-ness. The military personnel, for instance, had been surprised and suspicious when we simply handed them their weapons after awakening them. They’d checked their ammo, and several had taken test shots. They still seemed to think it was some obscure practical joke, and were bracing for the punch line.

Hazjiar turned to face me. “What of the Others? Will they still be a threat to us?”

“We suspect that they are heading for our home, right now. They were angry at our actions in your home system. We’re preparing for them. But you’re pretty far away from their home world, now.”

“And still you do not seek payment?”

“It’s not how we work, Hazjiar.”

“You are Dozhagriyl.” Critters with broken brains.

I laughed, careful to use the Pav version of humor. “Many of us would agree.”

“So, why do you do this?”

I shifted in my chair. “A desire to help, partly. And, I think, feelings of guilt because we were there when the Others arrived and we couldn’t stop them.”

“The results would have been the same, had you not shown up, would they not?” Hazjiar cocked her head at me in a very human-like expression.

This was old ground. There seemed to be some concepts on which our species just couldn’t seem to connect.

“I know, Hazjiar. Our reactions don’t always make complete sense, even to us.”

Hazjiar laughed. “On that, at least, we are very similar.” She motioned to the fields. “What now?”

“As I’ve said before, we’ll be as present or as absent as you want. We’ll keep you up to date on what happens with the Others, and help you if you want to go back to Pav. Or even just take a look.”

Hazjiar shuddered. “I suspect it will be many years before any of us can stomach that. I still have nightmares from the images, the day you first woke us.”

I nodded, not saying anything.

“Our people have settled in well. The residences are generous and well designed. The animals of this world have already learned not to bother us.” She eyed me speculatively. “Are there more surprises you may have for me?”

“No, Hazjiar.” I shook my head before remembering that the Pav expression of negation was a side-to-side wag. I adjusted my movement and Hazjiar laughed. “It is okay, Jock, I am starting to learn your expressions as well.”

“I appreciate that. And no, I think we’ve got it all covered. You have good mineral deposits within easy distance. You’ll be able to build up an industrial base within a few years. There’s nothing on this planet big enough or mean enough to give you trouble.” I chuckled. “Unlike some of the other planets that we have colonized, you don’t appear to have any flying nasties to worry about. Possibly they haven’t evolved here, yet.”

“That word again. I know you have explained it to our physicians. There is much argument.” Hazjiar sat silently for a few seconds. “You mean well, but your existence, and even your casual conversation, contains thoughts and ideas that, perhaps, we are not ready for.”

After a moment, she stood up. “Perhaps our children will be better prepared. Thank you, Jock, for the information. And for everything you’ve done. I will convey this to the Council, and will use the communicator if we need to talk more.”

It was a dismissal. Well, it could have been a lot worse. At least they weren’t shooting at us on sight. We exchanged the standard Pav head-bob, and I stepped off the porch.

The cargo drone settled to the ground in front of me, and I noticed the soldiers going into high alert. And why not? For a civilization in which a steam engine was the latest in high-tech, floating spaceships would be beyond explanation or even description. They understood the reality now in principle, but still not right down in their nonexistent boots.

I climbed into the cargo bay, then turned to face the soldiers. As the doors started to close, I gave them the Vulcan salute.





49. Surveillance



Riker

November 2248

Sol

A ding announced the arrival of an email. I swiveled in my chair and pulled it up in the holotank.

From Mario. This could be interesting.

It had been eight years since Mario started on my suggested plan to investigate the Others’ home system. The lead time was inevitable, of course. The drones couldn’t fall through the system at interstellar speeds and go unnoticed. And falling in from the Oort was a slow process, otherwise.

Oh, Mario had given them a good push. But hopefully not enough to set off alarms.

I paged through the documents, scanning the headers, then reading interesting items. When I was done, I sent a video chat request to Mario. He popped up right away.

“Hi, Will. You looked through the stuff?”

“Yeah, looks like they got suspicious in the end.”

Mario laughed. “Uh huh, started shooting down every piece of debris they could detect. Including a lot of just plain old rocks. Which is fine with me.”

“But the stuff you did get…”

“Right. Construction of the sphere proceeds apace.” Mario thought for a moment. “What was of more interest was the almost complete absence of death asteroids and cargo vessels.”

“I noticed that, Mario. In fact, the Delta Pavonis expedition would account for every unit we could see.”

“So either that’s all they’ve ever had…” Mario frowned into the video. “…or everything else is out somewhere.”

I nodded. “And you’ve got eyes on every system in the area.”

“Yup. Ain’t no harvesting going on, nohow.”

I sat back, staring into space. “Thanks, Mario. I think that settles it, at least for me. I’m going to re-check my detection array.”

Mario nodded and closed the video.

Yep. No question. Something wicked, et cetera. Bradbury had nothing on this.





50. A Space Odyssey



Bob

April 2225

Delta Eridani

Marvin laughed so hard he was in danger of sliding out of his La-Z-Boy, prompting Spike to leap up and scamper under one of the side tables. I waited patiently for the drama to end.

“That’s great.” Marvin wiped tears from his eyes. “I’m just sad that the Deltans will never get the reference.”

“Well, we can explain it to them when we meet. Even show them the movie.”

“So it’s a strong magnetic anomaly, on the largest moon?”

“Yep.” I grinned at him. “And a big black monolith in the center. Dimensions one by four by nine. Except this one will have writing on it. Or maybe in it.”

“You are evil.”

“I thought about having it play the opening music to 2001, but with no air and all…”

Marvin laughed again and shook his head.

* * *

I strolled through Camelot, enjoying the scents and sights of people at work, at play, cooking meals, or just relaxing. Over at one end of the common area, Archimedes sat with his three apprentices, holding up and slowly rotating a flint nodule while he talked.

The Caerleon residents had been dubious at first, but a bagful of Archimedes’ best spear-points had silenced all but the most paranoid. In short order, a dozen Deltans had shown up on Archimedes’ doorstep, ready to be trained.

Two months later, the group had been reduced to these three, the smartest—or at least most determined—of the volunteers. Archimedes admitted to me in private that they didn’t totally suck.

With the reduction in tension, both Caerleon and Camelot had discovered opportunities for trade. For one, the weird giant-potato-like tubers that the Deltans favored grew in profusion around Caerleon. Small crafts, straightened spear and arrow shafts, even labor for things like building tents ensured a steady growth of commerce.

Not bad.

Archimedes paused in his lecture for a coughing fit. The symptoms worried me. The coughing started after the beating he’d gotten during the abortive kidnapping. It wasn’t getting worse, but it wasn’t particularly getting better, either.

I resolved to get a SUDDAR scan, if I could arrange it.

Finally, the group broke up, the three Caerleon residents heading back home for the night. I walked over to Archimedes, who was stretching carefully.

“That side still bother you?” I asked.

“I don’t think it’ll ever go away, Robert. I don’t think the bone set properly.” Archimedes grimaced and tried to work the muscles around the tight area.

Once again, I felt a moment of helpless rage that I’d been unprepared for the tactic, and unable to do more.

We headed for the mesa, to get some late afternoon sun. On the way up, I had a flashback to a time, fifty-seven years ago, when I would make this trek up the path as a floating, football-sized drone, alongside a much younger Archimedes. He now looked very much like Moses had back then. I supposed this was the same thing people went through when they suddenly realized their parents wouldn’t be around much longer.

Archimedes claimed his favorite spot, and I settled down beside him. As I swept my gaze over the panorama, I realized that nothing much had changed. The Deltans hadn’t yet reached the stage where they would deliberately start clearing forest.

Maybe it was a good thing I’d never gotten around to teaching them to domesticate livestock. There really was no hurry.





51. Moot



Bill

June 2230

Epsilon Eridani

I waited for the catcalls to die down. More than a hundred Bobs looked back at me, and this wasn’t close to all of us. The war effort was now producing a couple of dozen new Bobs per year, over several systems.

Herschel and Neil huddled together near the front of the crowd, whispering and preparing notes. They’d be giving one of their regular updates on the Bellerophon. The two Bobs were as inseparable as Calvin and Goku, except less quarrelsome. As a youth, I’d always wished for a brother. I wondered if some Bobs in the same cohort got into that mode for just that reason.

“Okay, everyone. We’ve got updates from Oliver, Will, myself, and Dexter on Bob production. I’ll be giving a summary. Herschel and Neil will give us an update on their excellent adventure. Garfield will give a report on weapons research, and on the Casimir power core. After that it’s open floor.”

There were a few clink sounds as Bobs dealt with coffees and beers, but everyone was all business now.

I went through the reports, projections, and graphs on replicant production. “Bottom line, folks, we expect to have close to five hundred dreadnaught-class vessels available for the defense of Earth. About half will be staffed by AMIs carrying H-bombs. We’ve already decided not to try to build a defense for Epsilon Eridani. If they show up there, I’ll just blow everything up and bail. And on that subject, Mario?”

Mario stepped forward. “We’ve rebuilt the surveillance and monitoring system around GL 877. The Others’ Delta Pavonis expedition is back home, but there’s been no other activity. We don’t know enough about their habits to know if that’s unusual. The quick sequence of sorties to GL 54, NN 4285, and Delta Pavonis might have been an exception. Or they might have enough material to keep them busy for a while.”

Out of the corner of my eye, I could see Neil frowning and shaking his head. I resolved to ask him about it.

The questions quickly ran down on the military buildup. Herschel and Neil were up next.

Herschel stammered and blushed when their turn was announced, but soon got it under control.

“Nothing really new, other than exploratory notes. We’re continuing to investigate the interior of the Bellerophon, and although we’re able to answer some questions that have been asked, we just keep running into new questions. The ship appears to have been multi-purpose. Moving mining cargo was just one intended use. The way the cargo bays can be reconfigured…” Herschel shook his head, telegraphing the perplexity that shaded every one of their written reports.

The Bellerophon blog was currently one of the most popular on BobNet, so this was more review than anything. There were one or two pro forma questions, then the two stepped back with relief written all over their faces.

Garfield stepped forward. “We’ve been pursuing militarization on two fronts—improvement of existing weaponry, and creation of new modes. The second hasn’t been all that fruitful. We’ve managed to build big honkin’ lasers, and they’re a little more effective against big enemy ships than plasma spikes, but like the spikes they suffer from an inability to follow the enemy. Where light-speed lag is a significant factor, if the enemy changes direction after you’ve fired, you’ve just wasted a shot.”

Garfield looked around at his audience. “Intelligent weapons remain our best tactic, especially the ones that go boom. We’re working on hardening delivery drones against the zaps, and we’re working on bigger and better bombs.”

Garfield looked at me, and I added, “But in the end, our best strategy seems to be numbers. Lots of Bobs, lots of bombs.”

Will, after a moment, stepped forward and said, “We’re pursuing the problem on three fronts: One, defense of Sol; two, stopping any other expeditions; and three, some kind of final solution. If they attack Earth before we’re ready to defend it, none of the rest matters. But we can’t just fight a defensive game, either.”

He paused for a moment, and his gaze swept the audience. “It means we’re splitting our efforts, and it means an assault on GL 877 will be farther in the future than we’d like. But defense of the Earth comes first. And the longer they wait before launching an expedition, the more prepared we’ll be.”

“Assuming they haven’t already.”

There was dead silence in the moot, as we all turned to look at Neil. He was frowning; Herschel was blushing a perfect shade of tomato.

“Explain, please,” I said to him.

Neil looked down for a moment. “Remember when the Others started cleaning house around their system, then stopped? Why did they stop? Maybe because they’d done what they wanted, which was to launch something through a blind spot. And we did the predictable thing—we moved our surviving drones to the near side.”

Garfield and I looked at each other in consternation. “If what you’re saying is true,” Garfield finally said, “then they’re circling around, rather than going directly toward Sol.”

“And space is big. We’d never detect them except by accident,” I added.

Will looked at me. “We’d better run some models.”

* * *

“Yeah, space is big. Bigger than I thought.” I looked at the spreadsheet in dismay.

“Um. A circle of twelve square light years. That’s what we have to monitor.” Garfield rubbed his forehead wearily. “Almost eighty thousand drones.”

“Which will cut into the stasis pod construction.” I said.

“And the bomb construction, the Bob construction, the colony ship construction, and all the other maintenance stuff we still have to support.” Will looked up at the ceiling and silently mouthed an f-bomb. “It never stops.”

“We have no choice, though. If the Others come swooping in with no warning, we’re dead.” I thought for a moment. “At least we don’t have to produce them all at once. The most direct path from GL 877 has to be covered first, and we can work outward to cover more circuitous trajectories.”

Will stood up with a groan. “Right. I’ll talk to Oliver, see if he can contribute. We still have a few decades before the earliest that the Others could get here. Deliveries from Alpha Centauri would arrive in plenty of time.”

“Good idea, Will.” I looked around at the other Bobs. “It looks like, as usual, we will be living in interesting times. Woo!”

“Hah!”





52. Waiting



Riker

February 2252

Sol

“Well, that’s it, Will. They’re now completely dependent on us.”

I turned to look at Charles, slumped in his chair. The weariness was psychological, of course. VR avatars didn’t get tired, unless we wanted to. But if ever there was a reason to just give up, even for a few moments, this was it.

The report had just come in, and was sitting in my holotank. The last viable large-scale farming operation had failed. Almost complete loss of the crop, not nearly enough saved to make up seed stock for the next year, even if nothing was allocated to consumption.

“Right.” I sighed. “So, do we reallocate our dwindling supply of metal to make more farming donuts to keep them fed?”

“Or more colony ships to get them off-planet?” Charles knew the routine, and slid smoothly into the mantra.

“Or stasis pods to put some people on ice to reduce the pressure on supplies?” I finished the litany without emotion.

It was old news. Geometric progression sounded great on paper, but it assumed you had infinite resources to draw upon, and no external pressures. The reality was less forgiving.

“So, what now, Will?”

“Well, the good news, if you can call it that, is that without any more farming requirements, we can start moving enclaves underground.”

“Yeehah.”

“This will be a fun session. You want to join?”

Charles shook his head. “Not even on a bet. Let me know how it goes.” And with that, he popped out.

I grimaced. Yeehah, indeed.

* * *

The UN meeting was quiet, even by recent standards. Everyone present understood that the event, although small in itself, represented a watershed moment for humanity.

Minister Sabrina Scott currently had the floor. She gazed into the camera for a moment. “Mr. Riker has provided his projections based on each option moving forward. None are attractive. All have risks. We face some hard choices over the next several sessions, and we no longer have the luxury of interminable debate. I am therefore going to ask for a non-binding vote at the end of each and every session. The first time that we get more than fifty percent for one of the options, I will move for a binding vote.”

Scott relinquished the floor, and I noted that it was several seconds before anyone asked to be recognized. In the old days, it would have been a free-for-all.

Not for the first time, especially recently, I recognized a feeling of despondency. I would have to get that under control. The last thing they needed was to see me giving up hope.

And there was still the Bellerophon. They had enough material to build stasis pods for every single human being on the planet, once they arrived and we could get our considerable manufacturing capability focused on the task.

The question, of course, would be whether we’d have time to do that before the Others showed up. Assuming they showed up. And if they showed up late to the party, would they be content to just cook the planet and be done? Or would they come after us?

This was a well-worn groove, and I couldn’t afford the time to keep tracing it.

Back to work.





53. Protection



Bill

August 2230

Gamma Pavonis

Claude gave me an unbelieving look. “Come on, Bill. Do you seriously think we’ll just leave?”

I sighed and rubbed my eyes with thumb and forefinger. VR or not, it still felt good.

I was visiting Claude’s VR, which was currently a beach scene, complete with gulls, sand, and deck chairs. I was impressed with the level of detail. The breeze felt cool and smelled salty, and the sand was warm on my bare feet. The overall effect was seductive. With an effort of will, I brought myself back on task.

“I’m not trying to order you to, Claude. It’s not like I have any authority. But you were at the moot. Neil is probably right, and the Others are probably heading for Earth. We need—”

“That’s a lot of probablys.”

“With a large downside if the statement turns out to be right.” Claude was beginning to get my goat, and I delivered this statement with a glare.

He must have picked up on it, because Claude held up his hands in a fending-off pose. “Hey, no offense, big guy, but there’s some significant downside here as well. Gamma Pavonis 3 is an ideal colonization target for humans, and the system is probably high on the list of targets for the Others. This isn’t clear-cut.”

“I know, Claude, and it would be a major downer if the Others harvested this system. But I don’t think you’re being entirely rational. Gamma Pavonis is a colonization candidate, but at the moment that’s all it is. There’s no one here. Other than you and the other Bobs, I mean. No one would die if the Others show up—no humans, no non-human intelligences. On the other hand, if they’re heading for Earth…”

“Got it, Bill, got it. But, assuming Neil is right, we’d get there just in time to join the fight, but not really in time to do anything in the way of preparations.”

I looked up and took a deep breath. We seemed to be circling the drain, again. After the loss at Delta Pavonis, Claude had returned to Gamma Pavonis, accompanied by a couple dozen surviving Bobs, and vowed to protect Gamma Pavonis at all costs. It was a noble goal, but in my opinion misguided. Thus this meeting, which so far wasn’t going well.

I dropped my gaze back to Claude and gave him my hardest glare. “The same could be said of staying here. If they show up tomorrow, you’ve got nothing.”

“Not quite nothing, Bill. We’ve been prepping since we got back here from Delta Pavonis. If the Others’ group that hit Delta unloads in GL 877, then turns right around and heads here, they still can’t get here in less than another decade. And we’re going heads-down-ass-up taking advantage of geometric progression to build a large enough defense force.”

“And for what? There’s no damned way that Will is going to send a colony ship here, not while the Others continue to be a threat right on your doorstep.”

“Which brings us to your plan to take the fight to the Others. And not to put too fine a point on it, but you aren’t doing anything to help us prepare for something like that. We talked about that at the moot as well.” Claude was glaring at me, now. We were definitely covering old territory. And we would reach the same conclusion.

“We can’t split our efforts, Claude. Right now, we’re not sure if we’ll be prepared when the Others show up, and that’s without sending some of our assets your way. If we can get you guys to Earth in time—”

“You’ll need more than numbers, Bill. Delta Pavonis taught us that. A million buster-sized pinholes in the death asteroids and cargo ships won’t take them down. You need nukes, you need—”

“—exactly the same stuff that you’re building for the defense of this planet. Look, Claude, we’ve been over this before. Hell, I just caught myself starting to recite my arguments in a sing-song tone. Talk about rehearsed! We’re splitting our resources and efforts by protecting a second beachhead. It’s as simple as that.”

We exchanged glares for a few milliseconds, but it was clear that nothing had changed and no one was going to concede anything. Stalemate. Again.

I nodded and stood up. “Okay, if anything changes—”

“—we’ll revisit things, of course.” Claude gave me a shrug. The closest I was going to get to a concession. I raised my hand in salute and popped out.

* * *

I hadn’t really expected to win Claude over this time, but the failure still rankled. I couldn’t take time out to pout, though. My next scheduled stop was in Delta Pavonis. We still had a lot of hardware in the system, in the form of drones. As far as I knew, all the Bobs had left by now, but we still needed to keep an eye on things.

I took over a drone that was parked in orbit around DP-4, and trained the optics on the planet below. I hadn’t yet decided if this habit was essential monitoring, or some form of penance. Either way, every time I looked at the planet, my guts twisted in knots. It had been thirteen years since the Others scoured the planet clean, and the normal cleansing effect of weather was starting to show. The planet didn’t look quite as gray; the polar caps, especially, were back to a brilliant white. The oceans were beginning to show more blue than gray as well.

Unfortunately, the land was all grays and browns, and that wouldn’t change. Jacques, every bit as stubborn as his clone-mate Claude, had refused to give up any of the samples he’d taken. He’d explained, reasonably enough, that the biosamples were intended for the Pav on HIP84051-2, and he wasn’t going to take a chance on his inventory. He did promise to take more samples, if and when everything was established on the new planet.

It wasn’t completely unreasonable. I snorted in amusement at the thought. Jacques wasn’t unreasonable, but his impatience with discussions could be irritating. More of that Bobbian variation between clones, apparently.

Well, whatever. It might take fifty or a hundred years, but eventually, I wanted to start rebuilding the Pav ecosystems. It would be great, someday, to offer the Pav their old world back. And the metals issue could be dealt with.

But Claude was right about one thing—none of this was practical as long as the Others continued to be a threat.





54. Party



Riker

March 2257

Romulus

I knocked on the door, still not sure if I really wanted to be here. Oh, I was always happy to see my relatives, but Justin—

The door opened, and one of Justin’s great-granddaughters opened the door. Beatrice, I remembered. She’d been introduced to me on one of the video chats a few years back.

“Uncle Will! Come on in. Grampa is in the sitting room.” She shut the door behind me and pointed, then was off to take care of something else.

I looked around the house, or as much of it as I could see from the front foyer. There must have been fifty people, from gray-haired elders down to toddlers barely able to stay on their feet. The occasion, Justin’s seventy-fifth birthday, was being used as an excuse to get the whole clan together. Or as many as could come, anyway.

The organized chaos was—no, scratch that, there was nothing organized about this. The chaos was mostly confined to the common areas. Children were not allowed in the kitchen, as the women worked on the meal. Funny, two hundred years after Original Bob’s death, women still ruled the kitchen. Probably, I admitted to myself, because men would have just opened up a bag of chips and a jar of dip.

Well, nothing wrong with chips and dip.

I looked over the dishes spread out over the dining room table, already being attacked by hungry relatives. They were going all out, and I promised myself I’d try a few things, if only to catalog the taste for VR.

I wandered around for a few minutes, saying hello to people and exchanging a word or two here and there. This type of scenario had never been Original Bob’s forte. Small talk and cocktail party socializing had always seemed so shallow and meaningless.

But this was different. Every single person here had some of my DNA, or was married to someone who did. Every single person gave meaning to my life, and the lives of my sisters and parents.

I looked around, and realized I was stalling. Really, this shouldn’t be that difficult. People aged. People grew up, had children, grew old. Died. Julia’s death still haunted me. Now I was visiting Justin, on his seventy-fifth. I could remember the first time I saw him, as clear as the day it happened—two years old, sitting on his mother’s lap in front of the camera. Space Cadet Justin, laughing in delight at the pretty pictures.

With a deep breath, I entered the sitting room. Justin was surrounded by family, chatting, all making sure he was comfortable and wanted for nothing.

Justin turned and smiled when he saw me. He raised a hand in greeting, and I smiled back. One of the entourage vacated a chair and I sat beside him. “Hey, Space Cadet. How are things?”

Justin grinned back at me. “That’s Admiral space cadet to you, whippersnapper.”

“That’s uncle whippersnapper to you, Admiral.”

We both chuckled at the exchange. I looked at Justin’s face. I could still see Julia in him, which of course meant I could see Andrea. I felt myself starting to tear up and clamped down on it. Instead, I took his hand. “Just as well you retired. There’s nowhere left to go from admiral.” I hesitated. “Justin, we talked a long time ago about replication…”

“The day my mom died. I remember. Nothing’s changed, Will. You guys are still doing chores, and now you’re stuck fighting some alien menace for us. It just doesn’t seem like much of an afterlife.” Justin tilted his head and looked at me with a small smile. “I know what you think of religion. But right or wrong, I’ll die in peace. And Pascal’s Wager works both ways, right?”

I nodded, returning his smile. “Yup. If you’re wrong, you won’t have the opportunity to regret it.”

Justin was silent for a few moments as he looked around the room. “Y’know, Uncle whippersnapper, a lot of the younger ones probably don’t even recognize you. You’ve made fewer and fewer appearances over the years. Is that on purpose, or just the Others thing?”

And there it was. The thing I’d been avoiding. But I owed it to Justin to not evade. “It’s a bit of both. I think it was your mother’s death that really got to me. People die. And I remember each and every one, as clear as the day it happened. Over time, that’s more and more unhappy memories to deal with. I think I’m trying to move toward thinking of my relatives more as a group and less as individuals.” I gave him a small smile to soften the message. “It distances me a little—well, a lot—but on balance I think it works out better.”

“So I’m the last one of our clan that you’ve been keeping in touch with?”

“Yeah. Bob-1 calls it ‘fading into legend’.”

“Well, I’m glad to have known you, Uncle Will. And it’s nice to know I’ll be remembered.”

I snorted. “Look around. I don’t think that’s an issue.”

We spoke for a few more minutes, then I excused myself and gave up my chair. Someone immediately sat down for their turn with the clan patriarch.

I raised my hand in a parting wave, and Justin smiled at me before turning to answer a question.

Family.





55. Offsite



Bill

December 2243

Epsilon Eridani

I looked down upon Ragnarök, and it was good. I chuckled to myself, glad that I hadn’t said that out loud. Garfield would never let me live it down.

Still, it was hard not to feel a little god-like. The seas were finally connecting to form oceans. Atmospheric oxygen was up, noxious gasses were down. My moss/lichen mix had taken hold and was swiftly turning the orbital view from a rocky brown/gray to a muted green. I’d planted some conifers and grasses, and they hadn’t immediately grabbed their veggie throats and fallen over, dead.

Time to think about building the food chain, from plankton in the ocean on up.

I pinged Garfield, then popped in. “Hey, Gar. We haven’t done an in-person tour of Ragnarök in a while. You up for one?”

Garfield shook his head. “Sorry, Bill, Rocky IV is not quite ready. I’ve pared down the wing size, but I don’t have enough supporting musculature. I’m adjusting it.”

I shrugged, but I was disappointed. Our races across the landscape of Ragnarök, moose versus weird Rodan-like bat-thing, were highlights of my otherwise stressful life. Preparing for the possible arrival of the Others provided all the excitement and variety of the worst dead-end office job.

“How’s the backup site going?” Garfield asked.

I settled into a chair and invoked a coffee. “Almost done. Out past the Oort, not in line with the flight path between here and any nearby systems, and cloaked; it should be impossible to find except by accident.”

“Are you keeping up on capacity?”

“That’s an issue, all right.” I grinned at him. “We’re building new Bobs so fast, these days. What’re we up to, like five hundred of us?”

Garfield smiled sadly. “Yeah, weird that it takes a threat to our existence to get us to move our asses.”

“Or not so weird.” I snorted. “That’s kind of what Original Bob was like.”

Garfield grunted. “On that note, the latest batch of drones that Oliver sent to Sol will complete the coverage, once they get there and Will deploys them. From that point, we’ll get a few weeks’ warning if a convoy of Others is detected approaching Earth.”

“Still not great, but better than nothing.” I stood up. “Okay, Gar, let me know when Rocky’s ready. I could use the distraction.” Without waiting for a response, I popped out.

* * *

I took a deep breath through my nose. Ragnarök had a definite odor to it; not quite Earth-like, but not quite alien. I started walking in a random direction, admiring the grass that grew between the trees, and the insect life that was maybe a little too profuse. I might need to introduce another insectivore or two.

The human android body felt good. I still used Bullwinkle occasionally, but I admitted to myself that human form was much more comfortable. And now that Ragnarök had achieved livability, it felt much more natural.

All in all, the planet was looking good. Steady reintroduction of plants and animals from the Svalbard stocks would gradually turn Ragnarök into something that a human being would recognize and feel at home in.

Unfortunately, with the looming Others’ threat, this wasn’t exactly a prime colonization target. As one of the two systems that the Others had threatened to harvest, it certainly wouldn’t be high on the list of places to move to.

If they carried through on that threat, this could end up being all for nothing. The thought made me frown. If they carried through on their threats, it would be a lot worse than just Ragnarök.

If we succeeded in holding them off, though…

Maybe humanity didn’t need this one planet. Set it up as a preserve, instead. Let the flora and fauna evolve and repopulate without human interference.

That sounded good. I smiled and called over the cargo drone to collect me.





56. City in the Clouds



Howard

December 2226

Odin

Eight mover plates slowly lowered Rivendell into the Odin cloudscape. Marcus had run through the entire list of Barsoom city names, and many of the other science-fiction ones. It felt slightly cheesy resorting to LOTR names, but what choice did I have?

The city, whatever name we eventually settled on, was several times bigger than Marcus’ aerial cities. When using buoyancy for lift, bigger was better. Rivendell boasted actual buildings, too. Not that we had a huge need for them, but we wanted to do this as a proof of concept, so Bridget suggested we pretend we were live people. We’d even built kitchens, sanitary facilities, and infrastructure.

Bridget stood to one side, watching the monitor, hands balled into fists, willing the city to behave.

And well she should. This was actually Rivendell mark 2. The first iteration lay somewhere far below in the murky depths, probably melted into slag by now. Forgot to carry the two again.

“At depth,” I said. “Guppy, release the plates. Slowly.”

Guppy nodded without comment. The plates disengaged, and after a small bobble, Rivendell settled into equilibrium.

[Pressure is stable. Stress sensors well within limits.]

“Thanks, Guppy. We’ll take it from here.”

Guppy nodded and vanished.

“I always used to wonder, when you mentioned Guppy.” Bridget smiled at me, shaking her head. “I sometimes thought maybe you had a screw loose.”

“Confirmed!” I yelled, giving a fist pump.

“Oh, yes. And so much worse than I could have imagined.”

“I’m glad I can still surprise you,” I said, giving her a peck on the cheek. I waved a hand and the control panels for our androids appeared. “Shall we?”

Bridget took my hand, and we connected…

* * *

I undraped myself from the cradle and looked to my left where Bridget’s android was just doing the same. A quick glance around didn’t reveal any obvious problems. Bridget took a few moments to get used to the android form—walking around in circles, clenching and unclenching her hands. Then she looked at me and gave me a wide smile. Wordlessly, I grinned back and her and nodded toward the door.

We exited to a grassy field surrounded by low buildings on three sides. In front of us, the clear curve of the city dome rose from ground level, curving up and over us to cover and contain Rivendell.

Without a word, Bridget and I hurried to the edge of the dome. Placing our hands on the transparent fibrex, we gazed in awe out at Odin. Flocks of krill wafted by, blown about by atmospheric currents. Small predators chased the krill, larger predators chased the smaller. A pod of blimps floated by in the distance, shadowed by the usual mantas, hoping for an incautious juvenile to stray. For layer upon layer, above and below, different ecosystems dominated, shading from one to the next.

We watched this panorama, totally entranced, until we were startled by a thump, accompanied by a slight shaking. I looked around in surprise. About two thirds of the way up the dome, a blimp had attached itself to the city. It appeared determined to hold on, and…

“Uh, it’s…” I pointed, at a loss for words.

“I’d say it’s definitely a he,” Bridget replied, chortling.

“So he’s... It looks like he…um…”

“He likes us.” Bridget bent over and began to laugh, full belly laughs, arms wrapped around herself.

“Not a single one of my engineering courses covered this,” I said.

Bridget fell over onto the grass.

Up above, the blimp continued to prove its love.





57. Detection



Riker

April 2257

Sol

Eighty thousand observation drones generated a lot of false positives. Even with the filtering algorithms I’d worked out, I still had to check a significant number of flagged items every day. After all, false positives were tedious. Skipping a real positive would be disastrous.

Just the same, the process had become a humdrum routine, to the point where I almost went right past the first significant signal in twenty-seven years of monitoring.

I jerked in my seat as the details registered. Far too regular to be background noise, too persistent to be an instrumentation glitch. The readings were barely detectable, but they still screamed danger. I skipped forward through several hours of log entries, and finally had to accept that I wasn’t going to be able to explain this away.

With a feeling of dread, I sent a text to Bill. Positive detection.

Within moments, Bill popped in. “Way to ruin my day, Will. Okay, let’s see it.”

Wordlessly, I gestured to the monitor window. Bill sat down, pulled the window around so it faced him squarely, and began to scan. I could see his eyes moving as he went over the readings, his expression turning into a frown.

He finally pushed the window away and sat back with a huff. “Well, that’s it. We’re being invaded. I notice that the incoming is well off a direct line from here to GL 877. They expected us to be watching for them.”

I nodded. “Or at least allowed for it. Too soon to get a good picture of numbers, but I think we’ll have that by the end of the day. Do we wait to make an announcement?”

“I don’t think so.” Bill scrubbed his face with his hands, then looked at me with a weary expression. “There’ll be a moot. We want to give people time to get organized. I’ll send something out, with a promise of more information in, what, three hours?”

I nodded, and Bill stood up. “Okay, I’ll get it started. Keep the drones well outside the Others’ detection range. No sense in letting them know we’ve seen them. And forward me the update as soon as you have it.” With that, he disappeared.

* * *

As it turned out, we didn’t get as far as the moot. The readings resolved into individual signals in less than an hour. I guess we’d all forgotten just how big the Others’ ships were. Fifty smaller objects, which were probably death asteroids, and one hundred larger objects, cargo carriers, most likely filled with fighter units of one kind or another.

I sent a text off to Bill, and received a response immediately. Organizing something.

Ten milliseconds later, Bill, Oliver, Jacques, Garfield, Thor, and Claude popped into my VR. I noted the complaint from Guppy as the VR memory usage ballooned, and turned off Spike and Jeeves to compensate.

“Well, that sucks,” Bill said as he looked at the display wall I’d put up. “I think they’ve probably sent everything they have at us.”

“Except the Delta Pavonis expedition, which arrived back at GL 877 well after this bunch likely launched.” Jacques looked around at us, his arms crossed. None of us were fans of the Others, of course, but Jacques seemed to have internalized a really visceral hate. Couldn’t blame him, really. I had a similar attitude toward the memory of VEHEMENT.

“Thor, you have an analysis of the cargo carriers’ probable contents?”

Thor nodded an acknowledgement to Bill. “Sure, but you have to remember, at Delta Pavonis the Others were provisioned for the possibility of a local planetary defense. This time, they’ll be provisioned for the virtual certainty of a defensive force that’s space-based, has had decades to prepare, and knows what the Others bring to the table. They’ll have loaded everything they can.”

“Everything they had ready, you mean,” Claude replied. “The timing of the drone destruction back at GL 877 limits how long they could have taken to prepare.”

Garfield shook his head. “Sure, but they could have just loaded a bunch of raw material into the carriers, and built stuff during the trip. It’s not like they have a shortage of resources.”

“Damn.” Claude rubbed his head. “So, how much subjective time did they have to build up a fighting force?”

“Hmm…” Bill thought for a moment. “Twenty-eight point one light-years. The cargo carriers aren’t capable of more than five G, and they wouldn’t be here yet if they’d been pulling much less. So I expect they went for minimum travel time instead of trying to extend their personal time during the trip. That puts it just a shade under two years subjective.” He looked around the group. “That’s a lot of time, but I think if they had loaded the cargo vessels to capacity, they’d have extended the trip. Thor, can you work with that?”

Thor nodded, then his avatar froze as he frame-jacked to work the models.

He was back in moments. “It’s still not good. I figure they can put at least twenty thousand fighters and flying bombs, maybe closer to thirty.”

“Oh my God,” Claude said. “And we have what?”

“Five hundred Bobs, a thousand AMI-crewed dreadnaughts, three thousand nukes, and five thousand busters.”

“Plus plasma spikes and lasers, not that those will be hugely useful, with light lag.”

“Well, hold on,” Garfield said. “Light-speed limitations work against them, but we could make it work for us.”

We all turned to him, and he continued, “If we can get some cloaked observation drones in close enough, we can track their location real-time and fire the lasers and spikes to intercept them.”

“Sure, but if they do that mega-ping thing, they’ll see the drones and know we’re on to them.”

Garfield shrugged at Thor. “But if they do the mega-ping, they’ll be announcing their presence. They might be reluctant to do that until the last second.”

I rubbed my eyes with thumb and forefinger. “Damn, I wish Butterworth was still around.”

Bill grinned at me. “I don’t think I’ve ever actually heard you say that before.”

“I didn’t dislike him, Bill. We just always seemed to be at loggerheads.” I shrugged. “Anyway, this kind of reading-the-other-guy’s-mind tactical stuff is what he was good at. Original Bob, not so much.”

There were quiet nods around the table. “Yeah,” Garfield said, “we really weren’t good at things like chess, for just that reason.”

The moment of contemplative silence was broken by Thor. “Yeah, whatever. Look, we can calculate when they’ll probably consider it too late for us to do anything. That’s when they’ll ping. We just have to make our move sooner.”

“Okay, Thor, you’ll handle that?” At Thor’s nod, Bill looked around at us. “Let’s try to get stealth drones out there. Let’s also send a salvo of stealth nukes as well. Anything that we can take out early will be one less item to worry about later. And send out the Jokers. Have them get into position early.”

I jerked as I received a ping, and Bill looked at me with an eyebrow raised.

“Seems Herschel and Neil are here.” I grinned at the others. “So at least we might be able to get the humans out of the way.”

Bill nodded, and swept his gaze around the table. “Right, we all have our tasks. Moot’s in two hours, let’s be ready for that.” He popped out, followed in moments by the others.





58. Arrival



Herschel

April 2257

Sol

I was jittery with excitement. In a few more minutes, we’d have decelerated enough to be able to VR-sync with stationary Bobs. We were never really out of touch, of course, but email was such a dry method of communications. No one used it for anything but reports and updates.

Finally, my latest ping gave a positive return. With a whoop, we threw our VRs open and sent a sync request to Riker.

[Connection refused.]

“What?” I looked at Neil. “Are we in the dog house?”

He shrugged, plainly as perplexed as me. “I hope not. If I’m going to be in trouble, I want to have earned it.”

[Recipient indicates he is at max capacity.]

“Oh.” Well, that made more sense. There was a limit to how many people you could host in your ship VR. We must have just caught him at a bad time. I sat back, ordered a coffee, and tried to relax.

Finally, Riker popped into our VR. Usually, it would be the other way around, but today didn’t seem to be running per usual so far, so I didn’t comment.

“Hi guys. I’m glad to see you’re finally here.”

“What’s going on, Riker?”

“It’s Will, now, Herschel. I’m trying to leave the Star Trek thing behind me.”

I nodded, and waved at a seat.

Will sat down, accepted a coffee from Jeeves, and took a moment. “Guys, remember when the Others started blowing up surveillance drones around GL 877, then stopped? And Neil…” Will inclined his head in an acknowledgement to him. “…pointed out that they might have launched something while we had a temporary blind spot?”

We nodded, silently. Will was doing a lot of summarization. Probably not just to shoot the breeze. Something was definitely up.

“We’ve detected their fleet.” Will put the cup down and turned to face us squarely. “It’s big. I mean really big. I’m not sure we can beat them. I am sure we can’t beat them before they get close enough to Earth to start zapping. And we have to assume that’s what they’re going to try to do.”

“Holy…” Neil’s eyes were like saucers. “How many people left? How many stasis pods do you have?”

“We managed to build three million. And lucky to have managed that many. Your report says you have five. Unfortunately, we still have a little under fourteen million people on Earth.”

I groaned. “Six million short. Can we double them up?” It was a stupid comment, and I knew it. The pods were engineered for one person each. It wasn’t just a matter of jamming bodies in. Luckily, Will recognized it as a rhetorical comment and didn’t reply.

“How much time do we have?” Neil asked. “Could we build bigger stasis rooms?”

“No time for anything like that,” Will answered. “And you still need the same amount of equipment for each person.”

Neil nodded. “What are we going to do, Will?”

Will looked at us, shook his head, then rubbed his face with his hands. “I don’t know, Neil. The meeting I just got out of was to discuss that very thing. Right now, it looks like we take as many as we can off-planet, and just hope that we can hold off the Others well enough to spare the rest.”

“Shuttles?” I asked.

“That, at least, isn’t a problem. We’ve been considering the transportation issue for a lot of years. We can move a million people at a time. Mind you, it makes a third-world airline feel like First Class, but if your life is at stake, you’ll put up with a chicken in your lap.”

Neil and I exchanged a glance. Things were getting scary.

“Will you guys be ready to load?”

“We’re all set up with our pods,” Neil replied. “We’ve prepped several bays for your pods. We prepared for a full fourteen million, so overkill, a bit.”

I shrugged at Will. “We’ve been considering issues for several years as well. I think we’re ready for whatever you throw at us.”

Will nodded. “Let’s hope we’re as ready for the Others.”

“How will you decide who to load?”

Will groaned audibly. “That is an issue that I admit I’ve been carefully avoiding thinking about. We’ll be abandoning almost half of the population of Earth to whatever fate the Others are able to dish out. No matter how you phrase it, this is going to be difficult.”

Neil stared at the ceiling for a moment. “Lottery?”

“That would be the most fair, I guess,” Will replied. “But I think we have to worry about efficiency. So biggest enclaves first, and move in an efficient path from one to the next. We can’t hop all over the planet just because of a random draw.”

“Wow.” This was mind-boggling, and not in a good way. “You’re going to make arbitrary decisions about who lives and who dies. How do you live with that?”

Will’s face took on a haunted look. “I don’t know, Herschel. I just don’t know.”





59. Reconciliation



Howard

October 2230

Odin

I was standing at the fibrex wall, staring out into the Odin airscape, when Bridget came up and put her hand on my shoulder. The subdued and silent approach made me turn to look at her, already expecting trouble.

Her eyes had a look—haunted, surprised maybe, but not horrified, not panicked. I cocked my head, waiting for her to talk.

She tried several times to smile, before finding her voice. “I’ve been invited to a wedding.”

“Those are always nice. Whose?”

“Howie’s.”

My eyebrows went up. “Hasn’t he skipped a few steps?”

Bridget smiled. “I’ve missed quite a bit of my children’s lives, it seems. But your idea of having Riker’s relatives—” she grimaced. “—you know what I mean, of having them talk to him, seems to have helped.”

“So he’s talking to you.”

“Um. And Lianne will be there. According to Howie, I should give her some time and she’ll come around.”

“Rosie?”

Bridget shook her head. “She laid down an ultimatum. If I show up, she won’t. Or if you do, for that matter.”

“She seems pissed.”

Bridget winced, and I immediately regretted the flippant comment. “Sorry, Bridge.”

“It’s probably permanent, Howard. She is who she is. She won’t back down. Howie said he wanted his children to be able to know their grandmother. He had to make a choice.”

“So, when?”

“It’s in less than a month. I’ve already asked Dex to make me a Bridget android. And you’re invited as well.” She gave me the hairy eyeball. “And yes, you’ll be wearing a suit.”

* * *

I was wearing the suit and tie, again. That was okay, though, because I got to see Bridget in full get-up. She wore a green dress, of course, to go with the red hair. You’d think it would be cliché, but apparently not, when done right.

In my opinion, it was done very, very right.

Bridget had held on to her apartment in Landing. Originally, I think it was just nostalgia on her part, but now it was turning out to be useful. We could keep our androids here when not in use, and otherwise have a permanent address on Vulcan.

At the appropriate time, we called for one of the communal transpods and gave the AMI driver the address of the church.

The wedding was, well, wedding-like. Catholic, of course. Howie looked a little older, a little more mature. His bride, Angelina, was beautiful as only a bride can be. I found myself tearing up, which surprised me a little. It wasn’t actually my family, after all. But that didn’t seem to matter.

At the reception, Bridget finally came face-to-face with her son. There was a moment of hesitation, and I braced myself to intervene. But it passed, and Howie embraced his mother. The hug lasted longer than you’d normally expect. Neither seemed inclined to break. I took that as a good sign.

Finally, they moved apart, wordlessly. Then it was my turn. I stuck out my hand. “Congrats, kiddo.”

He took the hand and grinned at me. “Thanks, Howard. I don’t really have to call you uncle anymore, do I?”

I laughed. “Call me whatever you want, Howie. It’s all good.” I looked at Bridget, who was barely holding back her own tears. “And call me whenever you want, as well. We’re always around.”

We moved aside to let the line advance. “That wasn’t bad,” I said to Bridget. She didn’t answer, and I noticed that she was staring off into the distance. I followed her gaze, and saw Lianne. Oh.

“I’ll, uh, I’ll be over at the buffet. Food calls.”

Bridget nodded, and walked toward her daughter.

* * *

I was just polishing off some excellent roast beast, when Bridget sat down beside me.

“And?”

She sighed and looked at me. “Rosie is emigrating to Romulus.”

“Seems a bit extreme.”

“That’s Rosie, Howard. Never back down, never compromise. She’s cut off her brother and sister.” Bridget’s eyes were tearing up. “Howard, am I being selfish? Should I just leave?”

“Oh, Bridget, there comes a point where you can’t be the one always doing the accommodating. Everyone’s tried with Rosie. It’s now time for her to do a little compromising. And I don’t see it happening.”

She nodded, but she was still not happy.

“Look, you can try reconnecting with her children, eventually. Assuming she has any. Remember, we’ve got forever.”

Bridget sighed and nodded again. I pointed to Howie, who was dancing with his bride, and Bridget’s face brightened.

Family. Good, bad, or nasty, you had to deal with them.





60. Sneak Attack



Riker

April 2257

Sol

Bill had put up a number of display walls in the moot room. Two hundred Bobs filled the hall, and several hundred more attended remotely. For the first time since he’d built it, the moot VR was maxed out.

The display walls all showed the same image—a graphic of the Others’ projected course into the Solar System, terminating at Earth. At various angles to that approach, with tooltips attached, were our counteroffensive units. We would be taking the battle to them, hopefully before they realized we were aware of them.

“We have to take out as many of them as we can,” Bill was saying, “before they have time to react. They have the size and power advantage in a toe-to-toe. But hit-and-run attacks favor us.”

Thor stepped up and pointed to one group. “Cloaked fusion bombs are going in first. Three minutes. These babies have mechanical backups, so even if they zap them, the bombs will still go off at the preset time.” He looked around. “We hope.”

I looked up at the countdown timer. Less than three minutes to first engagement. The tension in the room was palpable.

Thor continued to point at items and describe the tactics. My mind wandered as I reviewed the last hundred years. A hundred years to the month since I’d stopped the Brazilians from destroying the Earth; a hundred years since I’d first spoken to Colonel Butterworth. I would never admit it publicly, but I’d missed him greatly since he had gone to Vulcan, and even more since his death. I was more grounded than most of the Bobs, since I was the primary contact with our family; but I could understand the feeling of alienation that many Bobs were starting to complain about.

I shook myself and brought my mind back to Thor’s presentation. He was just winding it up, and confirming assignments for various groups. I nodded when he referenced my task group, then went back to watching the other Bobs.

Original Bob had never been a warrior type. Even in D&D he had tended to stick to magic use. Now, we were the front line in a war that would decide the ultimate fate of the human race. Not really where I’d expected my life to go.

I sighed, annoyed with myself for my lack of focus, and popped out with the others when Thor was done.

* * *

The Others had apparently considered the possibility of a sneak attack. Our scouts picked up picket drones outside their group at two light-minutes. Of course, they detected us as well, but we had two minutes more warning thanks to SCUT and instantaneous communications. We blasted their scouts and immediately changed course to be outside the zap cone when the Others inevitably reacted.

“Ah, crap.” Bill waved at the status board, where half of our bombs had just gone dead. “It would appear that they are better at predicting our moves than we are at predicting theirs.”

I looked at the board. “So they predicted that we’d scatter, and zapped at random.”

Bill nodded, but Garfield, leaning in, said, “No. Not randomly.” He put up a set of vectors on the board. “Look. See a pattern in those proportions?”

“Huh,” I said. “They seem to be very much in love with the Golden Mean.”

“Or they think we are. Isn’t it important in feng shui?”

“Yeah, the Magic Ratio. But…oh.” Bill slapped his head. “The Chinese probe. It was probably everywhere.”

“So they’re expecting us to act in a manner biased toward that ratio…fascinating.” I rubbed my chin in my best overacting style.

“Yeah, hey, Earth to stupids.” Thor glared at us. “We’re still down half our bombs. Can we get with the program, please?”

We all grinned at him and bent to our tasks. SCUT-controlled fusion bombs moved into the Others’ armada and detonated. A whoop went up from everyone at the nicely timed explosions.

It took several seconds for the area to clear enough to see the results. A couple of ultra-low-power wide-range SUDDAR pulses showed ten death asteroids destroyed or badly damaged, and twenty-two cargo carriers either missing entirely or drifting, offline.

Not a bad start at all.

Unfortunately, that took care of the element of surprise. Now the Others would go into—

And at that moment, the Others emitted the super-pulse that had so awed us in Delta Pavonis. With our greater understanding of the cargo vessels and the Casimir power generator, we were slightly less overwhelmed this time around. Just the same, the pulse lit up every significant mass within a couple of light hours, for a moment.

“Okay,” Bill said. “The sneak attack portion is over. Everyone move to main battle plan.”

The display walls changed graphics as we moved to phase II.





62. Foreshadowing



Bob

September 2232

Delta Eridani

Archimedes went into another coughing jag. Buster patted him on the back, looking worried. I grabbed the water skin and held it out. Eventually, Archimedes got the coughing under control and took the skin from me.

I turned away to give him some privacy and looked out at the rain falling gently in the village. The pergola—really, a tent with a frame and walls that could be tied open—kept us comfortably dry. I smiled to myself. Technology continued to advance in Camelot, and people’s lives continued to improve. It was a good legacy to leave behind.

Archimedes’ coughing fits had been coming more often lately, and I was getting very concerned. Talking about ephemerals and funerals in the abstract was one thing; now, someone I’d known and loved for fifty years could be in his final days. Plans ran through my mind—sneaking a drone in and doing a SUDDAR scan; synthesizing medicine or even anesthetics. It was all wish fulfillment, of course. There was no operation to cure old age, even if I’d had the required skills.

It forced me to think about my future here, though. I’d been part of the tribe for almost twenty years now, and I had lots of friends beside Archimedes. I could continue to live here, occasionally modifying the android to simulate aging. Hell, I could even come back as someone else in a few years. The question was whether I wanted to do so. Was there a point? Or should I just go with my original plan and fade away?

I sat down close to Archimedes, and he smiled weakly at me. “I may be joining Diana soon, Bawbe.”

“Hey, ixnay on the awbe-bay.” I wasn’t sure how the translation routine would handle Pig Latin, but Archimedes chuckled.

“Sorry, Robert.” He paused to breathe for a few moments. Even that seemed to be more effort. “It’s been great having you around for all these years. It’s been a most interesting, and a very good life. But I think I’m done.”

I put my hand on his arm. “Hang in there, buddy. There’s so much more to see.”

Belinda came over with a wooden bowl filled with stew. We made sure Archimedes was sitting comfortably and she placed it before him. Archimedes ate slowly, methodically, more as a chore that needed to be done than out of any sense of enjoyment. At that moment, I truly realized that he was just waiting to die. An overwhelming wave of sadness almost incapacitated me. I had to take deep breaths to keep from having a panic attack. Which, when I thought about it, was pretty silly. Computer, remember?

But however I parsed it, my friend was dying.





62. Life in the Clouds



Howard

February 2244

Epsilon Eridani



“Honey, I’m home!”

Bridget turned to me as I closed the apartment door. “And that never gets old.”

“Nope. Never will.” I grinned and gave her a hug and a kiss. “Where’s my martini?”

“It’s in the liquor bottles. Some assembly required. Make me one, too.” She smiled at me and turned back to the computer’s Canvas.

I sighed with contentment and went over to put together some actual drinks. Sadly, in real life, you couldn’t just materialize a martini. On the other hand, no matter how much I tweaked the VR, they still tasted better in Real than in Virt.

I handed Bridget her drink. She barely looked up from the Canvas but grunted thanks. I peeked over her shoulder. It looked like a species tree for some segment of native life on Quilt. Something with wings and a stinger. Which, some to think of it, didn’t narrow it down much.

The diagram took up the entire Canvas, except for the inset in the corner showing a picture of Howie, Angeline, and their three children. Bridget was a grandmother, and her complaints about how old it made her feel didn’t fool anyone. We visited regularly, using the Vulcan androids, and nana was a huge favorite.

I wandered over to the picture window and looked down on the city of Tantor. Yes, that’s right. Tantor. Some twit wanted a literary reference when naming the city and left out a letter. So now we lived in an elephant. Amateurs.

I snorted in derision and turned away. Bridget said, “Are you grousing about the city’s name again?”

“You read minds now?”

“There’s a tone in your snort that says morons. You were looking out the window. It’s not much of a stretch.”

I laughed and raised my glass in salute. We’d grown together over the years, and we knew each other as well as any married couple with decades under their belt. Bridget spared a moment to smile at me, then went back to grumbling and poking at the Canvas in the air before her.

In the distance, the city dome separated us from the atmosphere of Big Top. KKP had finally gotten officially changed to Quilt, but the Jovian primary had kept its original moniker. No one seemed to mind.

Blimps, or the local equivalent, floated past outside the dome, with the inevitable retinue of predators. We were beginning to realize that life on gas giants was as ubiquitous, plentiful, and thematically consistent as that on terrestrial planets. There was a mounting chorus of demands that we check out other types of environments as well. Good time to be a biologist.

Tantor’s population—I gritted my teeth as I had the thought—was up around a million, now. We’d expected some reluctance from the population of Quilt when we started building cities in the clouds of Big Top; but it turned out most people were quite happy to leave behind the overwhelming ecological maelstrom of the planet.

I sidled around to get in Bridget’s peripheral vision. “Any new nasties?”

“Hah!” She turned to me. “Honestly, Howard, I think the planet actually evolves new species as fast as we get rid of the old ones. Humans are an unexploited niche, I guess. I’m sure some of these beasties didn’t exist at all ten years ago.”

I grunted. So far, nothing had evolved a taste for android, so I was good.

I raised my martini to my lips, and Bridget said, “Howard, have you ever considered adopting?”

* * *

Alcohol is surprisingly difficult to get out of clothing and carpets. You’d think it would evaporate quickly, but the odor remains. It took several minutes of cleaning before discussion could continue.

“What?” Not my best response ever.

“There was that shuttle disaster a while ago. A lot of children left parentless. Things happen. People die. More so than in a truly settled, tamed society, in fact. There are similar issues on Vulcan, Romulus, and the other colonies. Adults have risky jobs. Governments are actually having to create departments to deal with it.”

“Bridget, we’re, uh, well, to put it indelicately, we’re machines.”

“This from the man who lectures me regularly about how I’m Original Me? Who once spent a half hour going on about Chinese Rooms? Grrrr. We’re officially citizens. We have friends. We belong to clubs. Hell, Howard, we pay taxes.”

I stared at her for several moments. “I actually do not have a coherent objection. Which is weird, because my immediate reaction is oh, hell, no.”

Bridget cocked her head and smiled. “You don’t have to decide right away. We have forever, right?”

I knew Bridget. This could have only one outcome. I was going to be a daddy.





63. Well, Hold On



Herschel

April 2257

Sol

Neil and Will popped into my VR together. Neil threw himself down on his favorite bean-bag chair. “The pods are in and connected up. Eight million pods, and it only fills up about two percent of the ship. I forget sometimes how big this sucker is.” He waved a report window open.

Will pulled the window over and began swiping through the report. “Everything looks good. Any issues?”

“Nope. Ours were already set up, of course. Your pods went in without a hitch, and passed all diagnostics. We have just a bit under eight million working stasis pods, waiting for passengers.” I gave Will a Spock eyebrow. “Are you okay, Will? How’d the thing go with the selection?”

“Um, well, about that…” He responded with a sickly grin. “I haven’t actually discussed that particular issue in public. I had a private conversation with a few representatives. We agreed that there is no scenario that doesn’t end with a lot of fear and anger, so we’re putting that off as long as possible.”

I groaned. When this was over, and I had some spare time, there would be a good cry in my future.

“We could hold off the Others, right? It could happen.” Neil looked at each of us.

“With no collateral damage at all?” Will shook his head. “I suppose it’s possible, in principle. But even so, we’ll have made the decision. We’ll have publicly abandoned six million people. I don’t think an apology will be enough, you know?”

I nodded slowly. This conversation was seriously bumming me out. Time to change the subject.

I pulled up my checklist and started ticking off items. “Transports will come in the front, out the back. Offload to the rearmost bays first, working forward. We’ll sit in low orbit to minimize travel time. How low can we safely go?” I looked over at Neil. “Did Bill say?”

“I asked that question specifically. Bill was surprised that we’d added the eight plates, and he said that with those additional plates, we could practically land.”

I laughed. “Now that would be a sight.”

“Maybe we should try it,” Neil said, grinning back at me.

I stopped laughing. “Wait, how serious was Bill?” Without waiting for an answer from Neil, I sent off a text to Bill.

The response came back in milliseconds. Thirty-two plates are sufficient to hold against anything short of ground contact. Why?

I stared into space. Neil kept saying something, but I wasn’t listening. Finally, he planted himself right in front of me. “Dude, are you okay?”

I focused on his face. “I might know how to save everyone.”

* * *

Will stared at me. “You’ve popped a transistor.” He turned to Bill. “He’s nuts, right?”

We all looked at Bill. I wasn’t entirely sure Will was wrong. Bill stared into space for a full five milliseconds. “Actually, it’s not that far-fetched. I’ve seen the blueprints you guys put together on the structure of the Bellerophon. I think it’s designed to hold atmosphere. They may have been built to double as personnel transport. It would certainly explain some of the design decisions.”

I nodded. “Like the over-engineered cargo bay doors.”

“And the power connections in every bay,” Neil added. “And the configurable walls.”

“Well, hell,” Will muttered. “So, do we just announce it, or do we ask the UN?”

“Do we have time to ask?” Neil added.

“Absolutely!” Will said. “We just don’t have time to wait for them to decide.” He smirked, then grew sober. “I think we have to make the decision, and now.”

“Emergency Bob-moot?”

“There isn’t even time for that, Bill. We’re down to the wire. We’ve been shaving everything as much as possible, trying to get it all done. We’re out of slack.”

“Vote?”

“If you want, but honestly, if you think it’s doable, and if it can save six million people, I say go for it.”

Bill looked around the room. Will, Neil, and I looked back at him. This was it. Four Bobs, deciding the fate of the balance of humanity. But no pressure.

* * *

“Slowly, dammit. You want to tear us apart?”

“Neil, please shut the hell up. Please and thanks.”

I could feel Neil’s glare, but I couldn’t spare the time to return it in kind. I was engaged in lowering a ten-kilometer-long, hundred-million-ton alien cargo vessel into Earth’s atmosphere, without destroying the vessel or part of the planet. Thirty-two mover plates surrounded the Bellerophon, the only thing between us and a very large crater.

“Two thousand meters,” Bill’s voice came from nowhere.

Nodding, I stopped my descent. I looked at the view from one of the attendant drones. The image was like a scene straight out of a movie. The ship pushed aside cumulus clouds as it settled through the atmosphere. As we came to a standstill, eddies and whirlpools of air created complex whorls and patterns.

“Station keeping, location one.”

“This will be the hardest one, because this is where you capture your atmosphere.”

I nodded. “If we survive this, everything else should be routine.”

“Nothing about this will ever be routine.” Neil grinned at me, and I took the time to grin back.

Neil controlled the cargo doors and directed the transports. A thousand transport vessels hovered off our bow, ready to begin collecting humanity as soon as we indicated readiness. Neil began, ever so slowly, to open the front and rear main doors. Air began to rush in, trying to fill a vacuum seventy-eight million cubic meters in size. The Bellerophon shook under the hurricane onslaught. Neil watched indicators, adjusting the door openings as large as he could safely allow. It still took thirty minutes to equalize pressure.

A quick status check, and Neil began opening cargo bay doors. We didn’t need to fill every bay—just enough bays to hold six million people.

I nodded to Will without comment. He returned a quick smile before pulling up his video connection to the transports. I noted in passing that he looked considerably less stressed. While we still weren’t exactly on summer break, the elimination of the need to decide who lived and who died couldn’t help but lift a huge burden off his shoulders.

Will gave the order to the squad leader, and the transports scattered to pick up every single human being on this part of the planet. The Bellerophon would have to make stops in ten different locations to get everyone.

It’s funny, though. Even with the hounds of hell almost literally baying at their heels, people still had to make a fuss. I remember being to concerts and sports events back in the day, and they were able to get tens of thousands of people into and out of stadiums quickly and with minimal hassle. In this case, they only had to get a thousand passengers at a time into each transport. Easy, right?

We lost sixteen people. Ten were trampled, four died from medical issues, and two were shot in confrontations with law enforcement. Wow.

“Sixteen people out of a million or so isn’t bad, Herschel,” Will said to me. “I’ve updated the other groups, so they’ll be ready to react better. But don’t let it rattle you, dude. You’re Top Gun, at the moment. Right Stuff. All that crap.” He grinned at me, and somehow I felt better. Or not as bad, anyway.

The real problems would come at the end. The first eight million would go into stasis pods, which made them very low-maintenance. But once the pods were full, people would be unloaded into the cargo bays in a zero-G environment, with no training and no preparation. Also no sanitary facilities. We’d found netting in the Bellerophon’s supplies, and we’d reconfigured the bays so that people weren’t just released into a huge cavern. But still, we expected interesting times.

The problem, of course, was that this was a last-minute decision. We had made no allowance for transporting active passengers. The plan mostly consisted of get them in, then bug out. After that, it got a bit vague. The goal was to get them out of range of the Others’ zappers. If we won, we could drop off our passengers at their homes. If we lost…well, no one really wanted to talk about that.

But for now, we would just worry about getting them loaded.

One small helpful detail was that the enclaves had been consolidating over the decades as they were moved closer to the equator. We no longer had to worry about the small, under-ten-thousand-population groups that abounded when Will first came back to Sol.

We had decided we would simply load each enclave into their own cargo bay. No point in subjecting people to multiple shake-ups. And tensions were high enough that violence between different groups wasn’t out of the question.

Although a fist fight in free-fall might be more amusing than anything.

A status window popped up, catching my attention. The transports had all cleared the entrance and were inside the axial corridor. Neil wordlessly gave me a thumbs-up and closed the main doors. They could unload the refugees into a bay while we moved to the next pickup location.

Twenty-one enclaves. Nine more stops, and we would have collected the entire human race, at least in Sol system, into one ship.

I directed the Bellerophon upwards. One down…





64. Battle Begins



Riker

April 2257

Sol

Bill looked in my direction. “Okay, they’ve shot their wad with the pulse. Activate the Jokers.”

I nodded, then sent an email to Hannibal, leader of the Jokers. The idea was simple. They started out several days away, accelerating toward the anticipated area of first contact. We’d tried to time it so that they would be out of range of the super-pulse, and therefore would be a total surprise when they came in. The downside was that they would have to be five light-hours away when the pulse was used.

As it happened, we’d timed it pretty close. They were slightly under five light-hours away, travelling at about 95% of C. So in just over five hours, the Others would be getting a large surprise.

A few seconds later, I received an acknowledgement and a strike time. We would all have to be out of the area for that. I set up an alarm to remind me.

Meanwhile, the first attack group had engaged the Others. Coming in at thirty degrees, just like last time, they sprayed the area with lasers, plasma spikes, particle weapons, busters, and bombs.

Bill looked over at me again. “Bomb group.”

The super-ping would have picked up a large number of dreadnaughts forward of the Others armada. What it wouldn’t pick up was the large number of cloaked fusion bombs in their holds. The dreadnaughts now started firing the nukes forward, using their rail guns. Cloaked, running silent, the fusion bombs would only be detectable if the Others sent another super-ping.

As the first attack group sliced through the Others’ formation, they scattered. As expected, the Others launched the insanely fast torpedoes in pursuit. Plasma spikes and rail-gun fire took a lot of them out, but we lost about half of the Bobs from that squad. I hoped their backups were up to date.

Immediately, several of the cargo vessels opened their doors and defensive forces poured out. No question, the battle was on.

Bill sat down and blew out a breath. “The attack groups have their orders. They’ll try to vary things from last time, of course, and we’ll be avoiding any pattern that’s even close to the Magic Ratio.”

Then, another super-pulse. Bill and I turned to stare at each other, eyes wide.

Bill was the first to speak. “That was unexpected. Our models indicated they’d have to recharge for at least a couple of hours, based on the output of the Casimir generator in the Bellerophon.”

“If our models are wrong,” Thor said, “then all of our plans could be suspect.”

Garfield came over. “I don’t think that’s the issue. Have you noticed that the defensive forces they’ve ejected are smaller than expected? I think they may have installed extra power cores in the cargo ships.”

“Less room for drones, more capacity to recharge.” Thor nodded. “Makes sense, and not a bad strategy, overall.”

“Can we use it?”

“Only in the most basic way,” Bill replied. “Less defenders means we might be able to get closer to the big ships before detonating. Let’s hope.”

With a shiver, I realized the Jokers might have been blown. I pinged Hannibal, leader of the group. It was the worst possible news.

“Sorry, Will. We were within range on that one. We picked up the ping cleanly, which means they know we’re here.”

I turned to look at Bill, who was looking as gray as I felt. The Jokers were a linchpin of our plan. If they were compromised, our chances of pulling this off would plummet.

“Shit.” Bill scrubbed his face with his hands. “Hannibal, we don’t really have a Plan B on this. Make sure your backups are up to date, and just continue with the plan. Maybe you will be able to get some bombs through. Maybe we’ll have them pared down enough by then.”

“Got it. Hannibal out.”

I looked at Bill with one eyebrow up. “And maybe pigs will grow wings and join the resistance.”

“What choice do we have?” Bill shrugged. “All we can do is what we can do, Will.”

Thor cut into the conversation. “Look, the Others know everything we have, now. But they don’t know if it’s everything. We could have other surprises for them. So let’s not panic. Make it look like we still have a battle plan, and maybe they’ll be distracted looking for what else is coming.

Bill nodded. “Good point. Okay, let’s advance our schedule, though. Throw everything at them, but try to make it look like we’re still offering a measured defense. Advise all battle groups, and let’s get this going.”

Which brought us to the large load of nukes that the dreadnoughts had just unloaded. The Others’ defensive drones were already forming up to intercept them, and several death asteroids were rotating to bring their transmitter grids to bear.

“Spikes on the defenders, lasers on the grids,” Bill ordered.

A horde of enemy drones bore down on the oncoming nukes. We activated the drives on our bombs and ordered them to begin evasive maneuvers. Meanwhile, we attempted to spike as much of the incoming as possible.

We had made improvements to our SURGE drive systems over the intervening decades, but we were still well short of the hundred-plus Gs that the enemy missiles boasted. It looked like they would take out about half of our bombs from that assault.

The death asteroids were another issue. They would take out the electronics on any unshielded device. We had hoped that the Others would depend more on the zaps and less on the missiles, but that was proving to be not the case.

About twenty nukes made it through the oncoming curtain of missiles. Now the death asteroids brought their grids to bear. We waited until some of them unleashed their zaps, then we proceeded to damage the grids of the vessels that had not discharged. The ones that had fired wouldn’t be an immediate threat for a while. We needed to take out the ones being held in reserve.

Then, the nukes reached their targets. Unlike in Delta Pavonis, these versions had mechanical triggers that weren’t affected by a radiation bath.

“I think about half of them went off,” Bill said, staring at the display. We waited for the interminable seconds until the view cleared.

It was success, of a sort. It appeared we had now taken out about a third of their force. Unfortunately, experience in Delta Pavonis showed that most of our gains were achieved at the beginning of the battle, before the Others adapted to our tactics. We’d have to do twice again this much damage to win, and that just didn’t seem likely.

With a grimace, Bill turned to me. “You should check on the status of the evacuation, Will. It may be the only thing that ensures the survival of the human race.”

I nodded and popped out. This would be a long day.





65. Facilities



Herschel

April 2257

Sol

“That’s your idea of a zero-G toilet?” Will’s eyes bugged out as he looked at the video window.

“Sue me,” Neil answered. “We’ve already had a number of ‘accidents’, not to mention all the people who’ve reacted to zero-G by hurling. Oh, and guess what? The sight and smell of floating vomit apparently makes people vomit. What a surprise.” Neil took a deep breath. “Anyway, it’s become a priority. This is basically just a big vacuum cleaner. I’ve got roamers going around vacuuming up existing, uh, incidents, and we’ll rig up some kind of privacy screen for use going forward.”

“God, I’m glad I’m a replicant sometimes.”

“No sh—uh, no kidding.” Neil grinned.

I spared a moment to glare at him. “What about food and water?”

“Food isn’t even a consideration, yet,” Will said, shaking his head. “We’ll strip the contents of the farm donuts before we leave, but that’s dead last on the TO-DO. Water isn’t an immediate issue, because the enclaves were told to bring a supply with them, even the ones who were going into pods. We’ll rig up a reclamation system, eventually. For now, we can drain some from the donuts.”

At that moment, we all got an IM from Bill. Are you almost done? We’re being pushed back. You may get zapped soon.

We looked at each other, eyes wide. “Too close,” Will said.

I quickly formatted a response. On schedule. Two-thirds done. Couple more hours, and we’re outahere.

He then looked at me. “Now, let’s see if we can squeeze that a bit.”

“Last transport just lifted off. I’ll get us to the next rendezvous as soon as it’s in the central corridor.”

Will nodded and popped out.





66. Battle Continues



Bill

April 2257

Sol

I turned as Will popped back in. “How’s it going in the Bellerophon?”

He gave me a sickly smile. “You wouldn’t want to be in the cargo bays with the humans. Neil and Herschel are taking care of it as best they can. Imagine roamers running around with vacuum cleaners in their claws…”

The unexpected image made me smile, but the levity only lasted a moment. Constant updates from the battle brought me back to reality.

“We’re being slowly pushed back, Will. And I think they’ve detected the Bellerophon. It looks like they’re trying to maneuver some Death Asteroids to get a clear shot at Earth.”

“At Earth, or at the Bellerophon?”

“Good question. I guess I don’t actually know. Although I can’t see them figuring out what we’re doing, from this distance.”

“Well, either way, let’s see if we can keep them busy.” Matching actions to words, Will marched over to the status displays. He pointed to the deployment graphic. “They don’t care about zapping us, of course, but they need to have a clear shot with none of their own forces in the way. That means no Others’ defenders between the Death Asteroid and Earth. How can we exploit that?”

“Kill them a lot?”

Will smirked at me. “Can you be more specific?”

“Hmm…” I thought for a moment. “We haven’t been making any use of inert rail gun ammo. Let’s unload a continuous salvo at the Death Stars that are exposed.”

“That will have zero effect, Bill. They’re too big.”

“And they’ll know that, and they’ll dismiss the attack. And about five seconds in, we start interspersing ballistic nukes with the cannonballs. That will have an effect.”

Will grinned, and turned to issue orders.

For a wonder, it worked. Six Death Stars went up in nuclear fireballs before the Others decided to take the attack seriously. They split their attention between irradiating the Earth and irradiating our forces. Kind of a good news, bad news thing.

“They just got off a zap at Earth or the Bellerophon,” one of the monitoring Bobs announced. Thor, I think, although I was having trouble keeping track by this point.

“Can you get a good estimate of the target coordinates?”

Silence for a moment, then, “Yes.”

“Inform the Bellerophon of any outgoing zaps in their direction. They might be able to react.”

“Ten four. Whups! Two more zaps. This is heating up.”

I turned to Will. “We’re not keeping them busy enough. If they zap the Bellerophon, this is all for nothing.”

Will thought for a moment, then gave orders. “Turn all our lasers, particle weapons, and spikes—every last one—on this group of Death Asteroids. Aim for the grids, to the extent that you can. And keep up with the cannonballs and nukes.”

“That’s going to weaken our overall defense, Will.”

“I know, Bill.” He shrugged. “But if we lose the Bellerophon, like you said, none of the rest of it really matters.”

Bobs shifted their focus immediately. The area around the Death Asteroids began to look like a Star Wars battle scene, at least on the displays. At the distances we were working with, and in vacuum, the reality was less visually dramatic.

We weren’t able to completely stop the Death Asteroids. They got off several more zaps, and Thor faithfully reported the coordinates to the Bellerophon. But we were definitely bothering them, and a couple of the zaps went extremely wide, to the point that we considered scanning for something we might have missed.

Then, success. Two nukes managed to float in close enough at almost the same time. Twin explosions saturated the cameras for several seconds. When the view cleared, the last of the Death Asteroids attempting to zap the Earth were gone. A cheer went up from all the Bobs present.

Will grinned at me. “It’s not victory yet, of course, but at least we can turn our resources back to the main push. How’s that going, by the way?”

“We’re still being pushed back, Will.” I shook my head. “And we’re running out of options.”

Will came over to look at the status monitors.

“Crap. Well, maybe we can get back on top of it, now. I’ll go check with the other groups, if you’re good here for now.”

I nodded, but I wasn’t hopeful. We might, once again, be depending on a Hail Mary play. Which, by the way, hadn’t worked out, last time, in Delta Pavonis.





67. Running



Herschel

April 2257

Sol

We watched on the monitor as the last three transports flew past the main cargo doors into the corridor. The pilots were pushing it, and would probably have some turbulence to deal with inside. Neil started closing the doors before the transports had even cleared the entrance. I waited until they were sealed, then punched it as hard as I dared.

The Bellerophon rose majestically through the atmosphere. Air turbulence was barely detectable, and dropped off quickly. As soon as we were above atmosphere, I maneuvered to put the Earth between us and the battle. Then I gave it every ounce of juice available. We shot up into a powered orbit at almost 3 G.

Zap coming your way. One of the death asteroids unloaded. Thirty seconds. Coordinates follow.

I examined the incoming data and did a right-angle turn. At this range, the zap would be fairly narrow, and I should be able to get outside its cone of effect with little effort. I was more concerned with the number of death asteroids that might still be able to send zaps our way. If they bracketed me, we’d be done.

Two more zaps.

This set comprised a coordinated attack. The first was easy to dodge, as it was slightly behind me, but the obvious move would place me right square in the middle of the second one. Not a bad strategy at all, I admitted to myself. Except that with SCUT comms, I knew what was coming.

I dodged in a random direction, and smiled to myself as I imagined the Others’ gunnery crew grinding their teeth-equivalents in frustration. Then I lost the smile as I realized that I’d just confirmed for the Others that we had FTL communications. I fired off a quick text to Bill, pointing that out. I didn’t know if the Others might be able to come up with a strategy based on that datum, but best to have it out in the open.

Another zap. I think this one will graze the Earth.

“Oh, not good. Neil—”

“On it.” Neil frantically ran calculations. Then he turned to me, fear written all over his face.

“Hersch, this one’s going to hit.”

“The Earth?”

“Cuba.”

“Cuba? But they’re—”

Neil nodded. “Still there. We aren’t scheduled to pick them up for another hour.”

“How long?”

“Twenty-eight seconds, now.”

I stared at Neil for a couple of milliseconds. A hundred and fifty thousand people currently made Cuba their home. There was no chance to do anything at all, not in that amount of time. “So they’re…”

“As good as dead.”

I didn’t know anyone there, of course. I’d only been in the system for a day or so. But Riker, that is, Will would. I hoped he hadn’t done the calculations. Thirty seconds was an eternity to us. Thirty seconds of thinking about people you know, now alive but soon dead…

Neil was looking down at his board, his eyes squeezed shut.

“I’ll tell him, buddy. Afterward.”

Neil looked up at me and nodded. He swallowed several times and got back to work. The silence hung heavy in the room for the rest of the minute.

* * *

We sent a couple of drones to Cuba, more to cover all the possibilities than out of any real hope. It took about two seconds before we had to turn off the monitors. The inhabitants had gathered into several open areas for easier loading. So many bodies…

The remainder of the loading went without incident. The Others zapped at us several more times, but never came close. They had no way of knowing, of course, that they would have better results zapping the Earth directly. Or maybe they were offended at our use of their cargo vessel.

Didn’t really matter.

Finally, we lifted away from the planet for the final time. I aimed the bow into a vector that would keep us in the Earth’s shadow relative to the Others, and poured it on.

It took several more hours of running before I was far enough away from the engagement to feel safe. From here, a zap wouldn’t do more than create a pretty aurora around the mover plates. The battle continued to rage. It had turned into a war of attrition. The ultimate winner would probably be last man standing.

“What are our chances?” Neil said.

I had no better idea than he did, of course. He just wanted to talk. I gave him a shrug. “If they win here, we’ll have to head for one of the other colony worlds. Which means setting up some kind of living arrangements in the cargo bays for six million people, while we build stasis pods en route. We could conceivably lose a million to starvation and disease. If we win, we can go back, unload, and build the rest of the stasis pods we need, then take everyone to 82 Eridani. But—” I glared at Neil. “—we still have to deal with the Others at their source. Otherwise, they can just regroup, rebuild, repopulate, and come back at us again, somewhere down the road.”

We sat, staring into space, for some indefinite amount of time. I checked the status of the humans, occasionally. Moans, whimpers, and hopeless sobbing sounded from the monitors. As hard as this was for us, it was infinitely worse for them. They’d been living under a potential death sentence all their lives, but it had been a diffuse, indeterminate and impersonal kind of threat. Now, the threat loomed over them, personal and immediate, potentially to be carried out at any moment.

I picked up a video feed from a random roamer. People had generally managed to wedge themselves into the netting that we’d provided. It probably gave some feeling of up and down in the weightless environment. The refugees nearest to the camera all had their eyes closed. Huddled, some with their arms wrapped around each other, they seemed to be trying to merely endure.

In some unknown time, they’d either be offloaded, or they’d be suddenly dead. Not much to look forward to.

I shook myself, disturbed by the morose thoughts. I had a job to do, and it mostly consisted of making sure the latter alternative didn’t come to pass.

At least the number of sanitation incidents had dropped off. Although I was sure the air in the cargo bays must be ripe as hell.

Then, a text from Will. It’s over.





68. The Battle



Riker

April 2257

Sol

I popped back into the command center, to find a scene not unlike an ant’s nest that had been stirred with a stick. Bobs yelled back and forth in a tone just barely short of panic. Several groups stood in front of display walls, arguing and gesturing aggressively.

I found Bill quickly. “What happened?”

Bill closed his eyes for a moment, a gesture of weariness and despair. “They pulled a fast one. The second super-pulse must have hidden a quick sortie by a couple of squads of drones and missiles. We got blindsided. We’re having to drop back and regroup.”

A sudden thought made me check my reminders. “Bill, we’re coming up on the Jokers squad arrival. Will they be able to adjust course, or are we going to miss cleanly?”

“Shit.” Bill looked down and rubbed his forehead. “Give me a moment.” Bill’s avatar froze. I took a moment to be mildly scandalized. Bill very rarely let himself go off-character like that. Then I smiled to myself in a bemused way. If ever there was an excuse, this was certainly it.

Bill came back to life, and his expression was slightly more hopeful. “It’s kind of a good-news bad-news thing. The good news is the Jokers can still make interception. The bad news is the Others have launched their own countermeasures. More than enough to stop anything the Jokers can throw at them.”

“Have they overcommitted? Does that leave them open at our end?”

“No.” Bill shook his head. “They have too much ordnance. Both we and the Jokers are outmatched.”

“So there’s no reasonable hope for a strategic win?”

“No, Will.” Bill sat down, tired and defeated.

“Then it’s time for an act of desperation, isn’t it?”

Bill chuckled. “Thanks, Mr. Spock. Well, why not? Maybe we can force them to recall some of what they’ve thrown at the Jokers.”

I nodded. We had a large complement of AMI-controlled dreadnaughts that wouldn’t hesitate to sacrifice themselves—gotta love AMIs—but we’d been holding them back in case an opportunity opened up. We’d be essentially throwing almost all of our fuel on the fire at once.

Like there was a choice.

I gave the orders, and almost a hundred dreadnaughts and assorted Heaven vessels threw themselves forward at full acceleration. All other vessels were ordered to get out of line-of-fire. We could be pretty sure that the Others would be using the zappers.

The Others reacted immediately, spewing another cloud of defenders from a cargo vessel, and rotating their death asteroids to bear on the oncoming vessels.

“They’ve made a mistake,” Thor said, bemused. We all looked at him. He turned and grinned at us. “Right idea, wrong vessel. They launched defenders from a cargo vessel that’s just a little too far from the action. Even with their acceleration, they won’t get there on time.”

Sure enough, the Others seemed to realize their mistake, as another cargo vessel opened its doors and disgorged all its fighter units. Too late, though. They’d get there even later, thanks to the delay.

I smiled to myself as I visualized some Others General, somewhere in the armada, screaming at his subordinates and waving his whatevers in fury. It helped, a bit.

A couple of dreadnoughts had pulled ahead deliberately. Now they detonated all their cargo at once. The resulting explosions cleared most of the first wave of enemy defenders, allowing the following dreadnoughts a clear path. They flew in, positioned for maximum spread and maximum effect, then all detonated at once.

We hadn’t built high-megatonnage nukes. We had built for tactical strikes, not destruction of entire cities. Still, that many vessels, each with multiple warheads, made for an impressive fireball. The theater didn’t clear for almost half a minute.

We cheered as we finally got a look at the results. Just over a third of the Others fleet was still in operation. And now they were forced to regroup, slowing their advance and attempting to reposition so as not to leave defensive holes.

Our guess was they would make increasing use of zaps, now. Better to take us down, then be able to recharge at their leisure before attacking Earth. Of course, that would have been the best strategy in the first place, but the Others had long since proven they were beyond arrogant. They simply didn’t expect us to mount anything like the same level—

I stared into space, my jaw dropping. Bill noticed and turned to me, a frown on his face. “You okay, Will?”

I cocked my head at him. “Bill, the Jokers are up near light-speed, right?”

“Well, yeah, we wanted them coming in as fast as possible. Not that it’ll do any good now. The Others can still knock the nukes out of the sky before they get close enough.”

I let a slow grin spread across my face. “But we don’t have to get close enough. We know from scans that the Death Asteroids aren’t particularly shielded against zappers…”

“Well, no, they’re more into handing it out. So?”

“At the speed the Jokers are going, radiation from a blast is going to Doppler way up. Way way up. Actually up higher than what the Others are using, I think.”

Now Bill’s eyes opened wide. He spun to face the status board, and spoke rapidly into the Joker’s channel. “Hannibal! Launch all your nukes right now, straight at the Others, and detonate every one of them at the earliest safe moment. Make sure you spray every Others vessel. Try not to hit us, but if you have to make a choice, we’ll take the sacrifice. Confirm!”

“Got it, Bill. Launching now.”

The board showed the Jokers emit a shower of smaller units. Close to a thousand bombs, originally intended to detonate in the middle of the Others fleet. If this didn’t work, we’d have wasted most of our remaining ordnance.

Bill looked at me. Seeming to read my mind, he said, “They’d have gone to waste anyway, Will.”

It was tight. We’d acted just this side of too late. Perhaps two seconds short of engagement with the oncoming Others defenders, every single nuke detonated. And five seconds later, the radiation reached the Others’ fleet.

The Doppler effect from the velocity of the ordnance pushed the radiation frequency from the explosions above even what the death asteroids could produce. We were, in effect, giving them a large taste of their own medicine. Any vessel in the path of that radiation, even if it wasn’t physically damaged, would be sterilized of all life. And there was a good chance that any electronics would be fried as well.

The cone of destruction was wide, wide enough to bathe about fifty of our dreadnaughts as well as the Others’ fleet. We watched their status lights flare red and go out on the board. All action in the battlefield ceased, as if everyone were holding their breath.

We waited. Milliseconds passed, then entire seconds, with no reaction.

“We’ve won, I think.” Bill goggled at the screen, frank disbelief written on his face. “It’s over.”

“Screw that,” Thor exclaimed. “I’m nuking them anyway. Who’s still got munitions?”

A series of responses came back. Too few for comfort—at that moment, we began to truly realize just how close we’d come to losing.

There was a moment of mutual staring, then Bill nodded and said, “Fire at will. Finish it off.”

I sat down heavily. “Looks like the humans will survive, after all.”

“Oh, right.” Bill slapped his forehead. “Herschel and Neil are still running like hell. I guess we should let them know.”

He grinned at me, and I motioned him to go ahead. But first, I sent them a quick text. It’s over.





69. Ending



Bob

May 2233

Delta Eridani

I set the waterskin down and tied the pergola walls open. Outside, another gorgeous day on Eden was dawning. Bird-like things sang, and squirrel-like things chewed out anyone and everyone for the crime of existing.

I picked up the skin and went over to sit by Archimedes. “Wake up buddy. I brought fresh water.”

He hadn’t woken up yet. I tried to let Archimedes sleep as long as possible, to keep up his strength. I reached over to nudge him, and…

Nothing.

No breathing sounds. No pulse.



I could hear a low whining sound. It took me a second to realize it was coming from me. A hand on my shoulder. Belinda.



“Robert? Robert? You have to move.”

I looked up to see Buster gazing down at me, sadness on his face. I realized I was in the way. I got up, walked stiff-legged to the other end of the tent, lay down and curled into a ball.

* * *

The funeral for Archimedes was huge. It was not just his family; almost every living Deltan had been affected by him, one way or another. By the time the procession was over, Archimedes was covered in white flowers.

When the family moved in to fill in the grave, I asked them if I could have some time. Everyone looked at Buster, who nodded. Archimedes and I had been inseparable for twenty Earth years—about eighteen years on Eden. It was a reasonable request.

As soon as the others had moved far enough away, I directed one of the small, baseball-sized drones into the grave. With the camouflage systems working overtime, it was almost completely invisible as it snuck along the ground and in. I reached over, moved Archimedes’ arm slightly, and settled the drone into his embrace.

Spy drones didn’t show anyone having noticed anything. I admitted to myself that it was a silly, meaningless act. But it felt, somehow, right. I wanted to leave a piece of me with him.

After an appropriate amount of time, I got up and walked over to Buster and the rest of the family. They turned to me, then wordlessly we proceeded to fill in the grave and cover it with stone slabs.

The drone, with the new Casimir power supply, would probably last centuries. Something would give out eventually, of course, but meanwhile, anything or anyone that disturbed the grave would get a face full of surprise.

When we were done, I knelt at his grave for a while longer. Afterward, I went to his tent, where Belinda and Buster were sitting. Belinda offered me some jerky, and we ate silently.

When we were done, Buster said, “You can have his things, if you want. You’ve been his best friend for years.”

I responded with a brief smile, about all I could manage. “Thanks, Buster, but I think I’ll be going. Archimedes was all that was holding me here.”

Buster gazed at me in a perplexed silence for a few moments. Then he said, diffidently, “Robert? You’re the Bawbe, aren’t you?”

“Yes, Buster, I am.” I shrugged. “And with Archimedes gone, well…”

“Will we be okay?”

I nodded. “Yes, you will. You’ve gotten control of your environment, now. You’ll show the world who’s boss. And in some huge number of hands of years, your children’s children’s children will come find me and mine.”

I stood. “Goodbye, Buster. Belinda. Live long and prosper.”

And without looking back, I walked out of the village to the waiting cargo drone.





70. Extermination



Icarus

December 2256 - April 2257

Approaching GL 877

Showtime.

GL 877 was still several light-months away, but at our tau, Daedalus and I would experience it as minutes at most. Comms was receiving periodic queries and updates from local Bobs—probably Mario and his group, still trying to keep tabs on the Others. Incoming messages were barely squeaks to me—the time dilation was far too severe for replicant hardware to overcome. Guppy was handling responses, but I’d asked him not to forward anything to me unless it was an emergency. I couldn’t afford any distractions.

I squirted off a differential backup, just in case. I wouldn’t get another chance.

I dismissed my VR and frame-jacked up to maximum. At this level, I could sense jitter in my perceptions as my hardware attempted to pixelate reality.

As we reached the five light-day point, I ordered Guppy to broadcast a message directing all local Bobs to get out of Dodge. Anyone caught too close to GL 877 in a short while would need a new paint job.

We had planned our approach so that I would come in from stellar north, and Daedalus from stellar south. At six light-hours distance, GL 877 was showing a perceptible disk without magnification. Continuous status updates between Dae and myself ensured that we would arrive at the same instant. Everything was in the groove, and there wasn’t anything the Others could do at this point to divert this delivery.

Time for a final check. “It looks good, Dae. I think we’re close enough now. No way anything’s going to fall out of sync.”

There was a pause, presumably Daedalus performing his own checks. “Agreed, Icky. Time to save our own butts?”

“You got it, buddy.”

I separated from my payload and accelerated as hard as I could toward galactic center. The rear camera showed the former planet of Epsilon Eridani, shrinking in the distance as it continued on its appointed path. Readings showed Daedalus ejecting in the opposite direction from the other side of GL 877. We would each skim the star, closer at periastron than the orbit of Mercury.

GL 877 grew in size over a matter of seconds. I could see prominences and flares on the surface of the star, and SUDDAR picked up the huge mass concentrations of the Dyson sphere under construction. By now, the Others would have detected the two planets, approaching at just a hair under light speed. Did they know? Did they understand, in their final seconds, what was upon them? I hoped so. The Pav had never had that opportunity, nor probably the species from Zeta Tucanae whose name we would never know.

Slightly behind me, the planet formerly known as Epsilon Eridani 1, a planet the size of Mars, struck the star at the north pole with a relativistic force equivalent to half the mass of Jupiter. At the same moment, the former largest moon of Epsilon Eridani 3 struck on the opposite pole.

Stars are hot, but not really dense. The two planets penetrated to a significant depth before they ceased to exist. The impacts created twin shock waves that raced through the star toward the core. As the disturbances penetrated deeper and compressed the stellar medium, regions that weren’t quite able to sustain hydrogen fusion suddenly found the ability. Regions that were already sustaining fusion found their ability greatly increased. Elements that were nowhere near being able to fuse in the current environment suddenly found themselves with the energy available. Helium fused to carbon and oxygen, and fusion cascaded all the way to iron. In a matter of minutes, the total energy output of the star jumped by a factor of several hundred. The delicate balance of outward energy pressure and inward gravitational pressure was obliterated, and GL 877 exploded outward at half the speed of light. It would take three hours for the star to swallow the entire system; however, it took half that for the blast of radiation to sterilize everything.

Fleeing the star at ninety-nine point some stupid number of nines of the speed of light, Daedalus and I would see this blast as radio waves. But we’d have to stay at high tau for several light-years before it would be safe to even think about decelerating.

That’s for the Pav. And for all the other, unnamed species that you’ve seen fit to remove from existence.





71. Victory



Herschel

April 2257

Sol

We had to wait several more full seconds for follow-up. Bill and Will were apparently very busy Bobs, for the moment.

Finally, Bill popped in, a huge grin on his face. And a patch over his eye, his arm in a sling, and several Band-Aids done in typical cartoon cross patterns on his body.

Neil burst into gales of laughter and fell off his chair. I just managed to keep a straight face, raised an eyebrow, and said, in my best frosty voice, “Really?”

Bill chuckled and vanished the special effects. “Well, inappropriate humor is our trademark, right?”

He invoked a bean-bag chair, fell backward into it, and went boneless. “I’m indebted to you, Neil, for reminding me how much we used to love these things.” After a pause, “So anyway, the carnage is just incredible. We lost 90% of our ships, and I don’t know if we have enough busters and bombs left at this point to hold off a Girl Scout troop. But we’ve knocked out every piece of Others’ hardware in the system. Except Bellerophon, of course. And we’ve got drones doing full reconnaissance, just in case. We’ve all seen the movies where everyone relaxes too soon. No thanks.”

We all sat, silently, for a few milliseconds. I called up a beer. Without saying anything, Bill and Neil did the same. We raised our glasses in a silent toast, and each took a drink.

But there was still that other nagging issue. “Bill, we still have the Others to deal with. We need some kind of definitive solution, otherwise the problem will just keep regrowing.”

Bill shook his head. “Problem taken care of. Sorry, we’ve been so busy that I didn’t get around to making an announcement, but I got the report from Daedalus and Icarus the other day. Their tau is up so high that it took almost a week for them to format the report and send it.” Bill grinned. “I launched a little experiment of my own, back in 2225. Never said much about it, because it was kind of a Hail Mary. I didn’t want to raise false hopes, and I wanted to ensure we continued planning for a frontal assault. Anyway, about ten days ago, GL 877 went nova. There is nothing left in that system now, right out to the Oort cloud. Confirmed by the monitor drones, just before they expired.”

Neil and I looked at each other in shock.

“We can do that? Dude!” Neil said.

I stared at Bill. “Someday, some species is going to observe that explosion and wonder what the hell is wrong with their stellar models.”

We let the silence stretch for a few milliseconds, content with the moment. Then Bill continued, “Mario will be sending out Bobs to do sweeps of the outskirts of GL 877 and surrounding stars. And we’ll implement patrols for a century or two in the stellar neighborhood. But barring any nests we might find, I think we’re done with the Others.”

I lost my smile. “So, we’ve just wiped out an entire species.”

“I hear you,” Bill said, looking at his shoes. “And philosophically, it’s a heavy thought. But given what the Others have done to us and to other species, I don’t regret it one bit.”

We nodded, once again silent.

“There’s something else…” I said, looking meaningfully at Bill.

He closed his eyes slowly. “Oh, God. How many? And how?”

“The zap that grazed the Earth. Cuba. About a hundred and fifty thousand people.” Bill opened his mouth to say something and I cut him off. “We checked.”

Bill nodded, silent. After a few milliseconds, he nodded to me. “My responsibility. I’ll tell Will. You worry about the people you have on board.”

“Speaking of which,” Neil looked at me. “Should we make an announcement to our passengers?”

“Oh, yeah, guess so. Time to go home.”

* * *

We unloaded the humans in reverse order, last-in-first-out. The first wave of transports had just left, and we faced a quandary.

“Is there any point in decanting the humans that are currently in stasis? We’d just be sending them back down to a planet that’s barely habitable these days.” I looked at Will and Bill, eyebrows raised.

Will’s eyes were haunted, and he was slow to respond when addressed. “I’ll check with the UN reps who are awake, but my feeling is, no, there’s no reason to. With them in stasis, existing supplies will stretch farther, and we can drop off our waking population in the best locations.”

“How long will they be in stasis?” Neil asked.

“You mean, before you leave, I presume,” Bill answered. “With all the debris from the battle, plus what you brought in the Bellerophon, Will no longer has a shortage of raw material to worry about. And all the autofactories that have been constructed for the defense effort can now be turned to producing nothing but stasis pods. We can produce the last six million in less than a year.”

“Well, hell,” I said. “Let’s do this.”





72. Recovery



Bob

June 2233

Delta Eridani

It had been a hard month. I’d occasionally tried to activate the village VR and observe, but couldn’t stand it for more than a few moments at a time. I hadn’t had much experience with death when I was alive—none of my close relatives had died, and the few distant cousins who passed away were little more than names on annual Christmas cards. Archimedes had been a friend, had been family. This would be what it was like to lose a parent or sibling. I wept a couple of times for what I must have put my parents and sisters through.

The insult to the injury, though, was how little of a ripple it made in Camelot. Life went on. Even Buster and his family, after a day or two, went back to life as a routine.

Archimedes had mattered. He’d made a huge difference to the lives of the people there, and I found it offensive somehow that he was so completely and so soon relegated to the past.

In my more rational moments, I wondered what exactly I expected. Parades? A monument?

Hmm, a monument. Interesting idea.

I’d long since taken a genetic sample from Archimedes, of course. The question of his DNA differences from the Deltan archetype was an ongoing topic of research. It took a few days to stabilize the sample, using the techniques developed on Earth—and incidentally used on my human brain. One more day, and the monolith on Eden’s largest moon had an additional entry.

I had a vague worry that I was going over the edge into some kind of obsession. Being an immortal, insane computer would be a Very Bad Thing, with capital letters. Hoping to get some perspective, I pinged Marvin, and received an invitation.

I popped into his VR and looked around. Marvin was continuing his self-imposed task of replicating every environment in every book and movie we’d ever read or seen. It had become a contest between us, where I’d try to identify the scene with as few hints as possible.

This one had me flummoxed, though. As near as I could tell, it was just a small town. I stood outside a small café, and I could see Marvin inside, grinning at me through the display window. I turned to survey the scene. Normal people, doing normal things, normal businesses for the early 21st century. But horses and carriages instead of cars. Hmm.

I shrugged and walked into the café. I sat across from Marvin, and Jeeves placed a coffee in front of me.

“Jeeves is a waiter in a beanery now?” I raised an eyebrow at him.

Marvin grinned and shrugged. “It’s not relevant, in case you’re wondering.”

I nodded, and let a few milliseconds of silence pass. Then, leaning forward, I began to talk.

Marvin, bless his cloned heart, listened without commenting, even when tears started to course down my cheeks. When I was done, I leaned back and wiped my face with a napkin.

“Jeez, Bob. A friend that you’ve known for almost seventy years just died. What were you expecting? To just shrug and move on? This is life, dude. The sucky part, anyway.”

“We’re not alive.”

“Yeah, we are. We’re not biological any more, but we’re still alive. We make friends, we grieve, we apparently still fall in love… Let it happen. Mourn. And don’t get all bent out of shape when other people don’t mourn as deeply. They have their own lives.”

I sat back and nodded. Marvin was right, of course. But something about this still bugged me. Suddenly, I had it.

“Y’know, Marvin, we kid Howard about his lifestyle choices, but at least he’s evolving. I think my problem is I stuck myself back into a rut first chance I got, and I’ve been there for seventy years. Still trying to be human, still trying to deny reality.”

Marvin grinned at me. “Say, you’re pretty perceptive today.”

“Nyuk, nyuk. Anyway, Archimedes’ death provides a clean break—and the emotional jolt to take advantage of it. I’m a post-human computerized starship, and maybe it’s about time I started acting like it.”

I finished my coffee and stood up. “Thanks for the talk, Marv. I’ll be in touch. By the way, the town—Nantucket, right? Stirling?”

Marvin grinned and nodded. We still couldn’t fool one another.

* * *

I walked slowly through Camelot. More of an amble, really. I had no particular destination or goal in mind.

I’d modified Charlie the android, changing the fur pattern, head shape, and height. Robert was gone, and this nondescript Deltan wouldn’t be around long enough to make friends or engage in more than casual conversation.

I wanted to have one last opportunity to experience Archimedes’ world, to feel the life that he’d lived. This was my goodbye to Eden. I spent time touching things, watching children at play, listening to the give and take of village life. I walked past Buster’s tent, careful not to loiter, enjoying the sight, sound, and odor of family.

And when I had had my fill, I walked out of the village for the last time.





73. Moot



Bill

January 2258

BobNet

I gave the usual blaat with the air horn, and waited for the standard well-wishes to die down. This was the largest moot we’d ever held, by a considerable margin—even with about half of our Bobs still just backups, and half of the active ones still in cradles, waiting for a ship to be built.

I would have preferred to wait until everyone was active again, but a growing background of discontent in the Bobiverse had me worried. Best to get it out in the open. I looked at Thor, who seemed to be the de facto spokesman for what I was privately starting to think of as the dissidents. I didn’t want to overstate it—it wasn’t like we were going to start shooting at each other. After all, despite the differences of opinion, we were still all Bob at the core.

Thor looked around, gauging the mood of the audience. Then he faced me. “Bill, it’s really simple. For the last hundred-plus years, we’ve been essentially in the service of the humans. We all remember the first meeting with you, Riker, Mario, Milo, and Bob. We all remember each person’s decision to explore, settle, and so on. But most of us have, one way or another, ended up spending most of our existences shepherding humans, guarding humans, transporting humans, and arguing with humans. It’s tiring.”

A growl of approval greeted this last statement. I looked around and realized that, to a greater or lesser extent, most of the Bobs present agreed. Even many of the earlier-generation Bobs.

“I hear what you’re saying, Thor. I’ve not been in that grind, as much, because I’ve been in Epsilon Eridani the whole time, playing mad scientist. I’m a little perplexed, though. Are you calling for a vote on something?”

Thor grinned at me. “Naw. There’s no rules as such in the Bobiverse. Everyone is free to do what they want. I think we’re just trying to come to an understanding of the situation.”

Garfield stepped forward. “Bill, remember that discussion we had about us being Homo sideria?”

I mock-glared at him. “Et tu, Garfield?”

“Not really. But I understand what Thor is saying, and I agree with a lot of it. We are Homo sideria, now. We’re something more than just people in software.” Garfield looked around. “How many here are still physically in cradles at the backup site or elsewhere?”

A couple dozen hands went up. Garfield turned back to me. “These guys, physically, are glowing blue cubes sitting in a space station, in the Oort cloud outside Epsilon Eridani. But they can be anywhere that BobNet reaches. They can inhabit a Manny on Vulcan or Romulus and go shopping, or fly a drone or a manta through the atmosphere of Odin; they can observe the Deltans, or help with settling the Pav, or visit any of the other human settlements. Or they could even take a remote-controlled Heaven vessel to the stars, all without ever leaving Epsilon Eridani.”

Thor took up the recitation. “Marcus got flying cities working on Poseidon and has completely altered their society. Howard and Bridget have built floating cities in the upper atmosphere of Big Top, and they live there full-time in android form. With a family of their own. Marcus has built dolphin-like androids to explore Poseidon underwater. Luke and Marvin are planning an expedition to go looking for Bender. Henry Roberts is trying to sail every large body of water on every planet of human space. Bridget is trying to catalog every species of life within her reach, and is arranging expeditions to explore icy moons and planets. Daedalus and Icarus are high-tailing it for the center of the galaxy.” Thor swept his hand to take in the crowd. “And we want to do all those things, but instead we’re playing taxi, or construction yard, or security patrol, or long haul service. And we’re a little tired of being robotic servants to the human race.”

I nodded, and looked down for a moment, gathering my thoughts. I looked up, and swept the crowd with my gaze. “I by no means want to minimize your feelings on this. I do, however, think there’s a certain amount of burnout involved here. This has been a total crapper of a couple of decades…” Laughs from the crowd showed that I’d scored. “…and I think you’ll feel a little less, erm, militant about it after a chance to rest.”

Thor looked at me, not conceding anything with his expression. “Maybe. And let’s face it, Bill, we’re not asking for—or threatening—anything irreversible or irrevocable. We just want the humans, and maybe the elder Bobs, to understand and accept that the species of Bob is not available as their collective workhorse. If individual Bobs want to help out, fine. But if the humans get themselves into another mess like the last one, I don’t think we’re going to all jump in and throw ourselves under the bus for them.”

“Will you require a treaty?”

Thor laughed. “Nothing that formal, Bill. Just the statement, and the understanding.”

I looked around at the Bobs in the room. It seemed to be a majority opinion, from the expressions. Well, what the hell.

“All right, Thor. I’ll put together a statement, get some input on it, then distribute it to the colonies.”

“And some of them,” Garfield said, smiling, “will go ballistic.”

“Oh, depend on it.”





74. Pav Announcement



Jacques

April 2257

HIP 84051

The cargo doors opened and I stepped out. Not surprisingly, a squad of Pav militia awaited me, weapons held at ready. I sighed and shook my head. It was entirely possible that the Pav military would never warm to the Bobs.

I couldn’t really blame them, of course. Every interaction reminded them of the technological gulf between us, and of their complete helplessness if we ever started making demands. Not a comfortable situation for a military mind.

I walked up to the group, being careful not to appear aggressive. They probably wouldn’t haul off and shoot me, just because, but why take chances?

The squad leader took a half step forward, and I addressed him. “Hazjiar is expecting me.”

The sergeant, or whatever equivalent, looked like he wanted to frisk me. Or maybe handcuff me, or just give me a good beating. But I was obviously not carrying anything of a technical nature, so he settled for glaring at me and showing his teeth for a moment.

I gave him a close-lipped smile in return and looked meaningfully in the direction of Hazjiar’s house.

This whole performance could have gone on for a few more minutes, if Hazjiar hadn’t picked that moment to walk out onto her porch. She made a gesture to the soldiers, and they motioned to me with their weapons.

I settled into a chair, bobbed my head to Hazjiar, and waited for her to speak.

“You said you had news? Presumably it is about the Others?”

“Yes,” I replied. “I wanted to deliver this news in person. The battle is over. We’ve won, although barely.”

Hazjiar nodded, and stared at the horizon for a few moments. “This is good, of course. But will they not just regroup and return? For how long will we be safe?”

“There will be no return, Hazjiar. We wiped them out.” I looked down for a moment, then met her eyes. “It wasn’t something we did casually, but they have obliterated so many sentients, and showed no interest in changing their behavior…”

The soldiers exchanged glances. If they were concerned about the gulf between us before, this wouldn’t have helped. I spared them a quick look, then continued. “We will continue to watch for them, but it’s most likely that there are none left.”

“I don’t understand your species, Jock.” Hazjiar paused, looking at me. “You have all this power, yet you seem reluctant to use it. You are so rich that you don’t even need money, yet you seem to have so little.”

I looked up at the ceiling for a moment. She was, perhaps without realizing it, hitting very close to home with some of her comments. “Hazjiar, we—all the Bobs, I mean—don’t have any desire for power over others. Quite the opposite, in fact. We just want to be able to do our own thing. And we may finally be at the point where we can realize that desire.”

I gestured to the soldiers. “You have power, in the ways that matter. You’re able to keep yourselves safe here. We’ll make sure nothing gets out of control up there.” I gestured to the sky. “Beyond that, unless you specifically need us for something, we’ll leave you alone. I think, as a group, the Bobs have finally figured out our place in the cosmos. So we’re going to be stepping back.”

Hazjiar gazed at the soldiers for a moment, then smiled at me. “Some of us, I think, will be happy to hear that. I am not so sure. In any case, we will live.” She stood. “Thank you, Jock, for the news. I will inform the Council.”

I stood and gave her the Pav head bob, and walked to the cargo drone. I stepped in and turned for a last look. As the doors were closing, I saw Hazjiar give me the Vulcan salute.

* * *

I popped into PRP. The Pav Reclamation Project had a dedicated VR, hosted in Bill’s Moot station. I looked around the room; a half-dozen Bobs watched video windows or operated drones on the planet’s surface. Ferb stood at the edge of the room, watching the activity.

“Hey, Ferb.” I walked over to join him. “How’s it going?”

“Slow but steady, Jacques. We’ve been able to produce at least a few of everything that we have samples for. Genetic diversity may be an issue for a while, but we should be able to bring back about seventy-five percent of the planet’s ecosystems, eventually.”

I nodded, watching a few of the video windows. “And the other thing?”

Ferb motioned toward a whiteboard with a number of items listed. “We’ve found some good candidate planetoids in nearby systems. Bill’s asteroid-movers will handle them easily.”

I nodded, satisfied. “So, eventually we’ll be able to offer the Pav their home system back. With a supply of metals.”

“Maybe a few decades, yet, buddy, but yeah. That’ll be good.”

We watched the activity in the room, enjoying the moment. One less thing to feel guilty about.





75. Rebuilding



Herschel

January 2259

Sol

Departure day. Two little words, but such a big meaning. Today would put humanity officially out of the Endangered Species category. Today, we would leave the Earth, looking a lot like a snowball, to its own devices for a few millennia. Hopefully, the planet would recover. If so, we had the genetic material to rebuild at least some of the ecosystems.

With the extinction of the Others, Gamma Pavonis had become a viable colonization target. Several colony ships had returned to Earth since the Battle of Sol, and were now on their way with a load of humanity to settle there.

And we now had enough stasis pods in the Bellerophon for the balance of the human race. Today, the remaining Earthlings were leaving for 82 Eridani, all snugged away in our cargo bays. By the time they arrived, Mack and the local crew would have built farm donuts and colony locations for them. Inevitably, some of the humans wouldn’t like the decisions. Tough.

The debris from the Battle of Terra, at least that portion of it that hadn’t already gone down to Earth in meteor showers, was all gathered at the Earth/moon L5 point. Autofactories were still going full-bore to build new vessels for all the Bobs that had been destroyed in the battle. Bill’s offsite facility was showing its worth—only a few differentials had failed, and in those cases the Bobs were simply restored with the last few minutes missing.

There still existed a general feeling amongst the Bobs that being restored wasn’t quite personal immortality, but most agreed that it sure beat the alternative. I decided I’d leave that particular philosophical debate until it became relevant.

I looked over at Neil. “Ready for departure, Number One?”

“Oh, bite me. And for the record, your Picard is terrible.”

“Yeah, but we’re still in charge of this tub. Not bad for pondscum, eh?”

Neil grinned. “Could do worse.”

Singing the Accountancy Shanty at the top of our lungs, we set course for 82 Eridani.





76. Pilgrimage



Bob

October 2263

Earth

Full circle.

A couple hundred meters or so, straight down, a city named Las Vegas had once stood. Lost Wages. Sin City. The place where my first life ended.

I turned slowly to survey the landscape. Icescape, I guess. The Earth was now in full snowball mode. Snow, once fallen, was not melting, and glaciers were closing in on the equator.

Today was a beautiful bluebird day. The sun shone down on the ice, leaving the world awash in light. If I’d still been biological, I’d be snow-blind by now.

I had arranged with the current Bob-in-residence, a tenth-generation named Harvey, to have an android printed up from Howard’s most recent published set of plans. I could have done this visit remotely from Delta Eridani—or from anywhere in range of BobNet, really. But I wanted to actually come to Earth, to make the pilgrimage physically as well as emotionally. The Heaven-1B was currently in geosynchronous orbit, thirty-five thousand kilometers straight overhead.

I raised my face into the breeze and closed my eyes. The air ruffled my hair and whistled thinly against my ears. Heads-up readings, visible even on the inside of my eyelids, indicated a balmy minus thirty Celsius—well within operating range for current android tech. The Earth was definitely done for, though. For a few millennia, anyway. There was some argument at moots about whether we should set up space mirrors to reheat the planet, or just let things run their course.

Bobs had been working, the last couple of decades, to make sure that every possible living thing was represented in the Genetic Banks. These days, we didn’t even take samples—we simply grabbed a scan at the subatomic level. Bill had been busy, in his mad science lab in Epsilon Eridani. It wasn’t quite Star Trek-level replicator technology, but it was certainly getting damned close. Within a few more years, Bill expected to be able to rebuild plants and animals from nothing more than the scans.

Pretty cool.

I looked down once more in the direction of Las Vegas, and thought back to that last day as a human being. I remembered the conversation with my mother and Andrea—and felt a deep and abiding regret at not having had one last conversation with my father and with Alaina. There was that last meal with my employees, who—I now realized—were possibly my best friends on the planet at the time.

Their lives were now less than a footnote in history. As gone, as utterly forgotten as any random individual from the Middle Ages. No longer even a ripple in time, except to the extent that I could keep their memories alive. I sighed to myself. It seemed sometimes that life was nothing more than the accumulation of emotional baggage—memories, regrets, and lost opportunities.

I looked up as I detected the faint susurrus of an approaching craft. Odd, since I hadn’t called my cargo drone to pick me up. I turned and watched as a drone came to rest on the ice, fifty feet away. There was a pause, then the cargo doors opened and two androids walked out. I queried metadata…

“Bill! Will!” Grinning, I hurried over to meet them halfway.

“Hey, Bob. When Harvey told us what you were planning, we asked him to make a couple of extra.”

“Are you guys in-system?”

Bill shook his head. “No, you’re the one on the pilgrimage. I’m fine with doing this from Ragnarök.”

I nodded, then looked at Will.

“On my way to 82 Eridani. I’m keeping the tau down so I can stay on top of things.” He grinned at me. “Once a control freak…”

I laughed. “How are things going at 82 Eridani?”

“Going great,” Will replied. “They’ve got atmospheric pressure up to something reasonable on Valhalla. When the people on the Bellerophon arrive, they’ll have three viable worlds to choose from. The colonies that are already there will complain about blow-ins, of course.” Will turned and looked out across the ice fields. “Humanity is well-distributed, now. It’s beginning to look like they’ll probably survive their own stupidity, after all.”

After a moment of comfortable silence, Bill asked, “So what will you do now, Bob?”

I looked at my two friends, then looked up at the sky. “Going out, I think. The new Bobs are right. We’re Homo sideria. And I’m tired of always finding myself committed to something. It’s time to cut all ties, just point the bow, and turn on the drive. See what’s out there.”

“You’ll keep in touch?”

“Of course.” I smiled at Bill. “I’ll stop and build stations, so I stay connected to BobNet. Someday maybe the net will stretch from one end of the galaxy to the other.”

“And we’ll probably still be around,” Will said. “As you say, we’ve got forever.”

I nodded, then turned toward the cargo drone. “You guys mind taking my android to storage? I’m going to travel light, I think.”

Bill nodded. “No problem.”

We walked back to the drone and climbed in. I turned to my two oldest friends, shook their hands, and switched off. And thirty-five thousand kilometers above, I turned on the SURGE drive and headed out to the stars.


1. Frenemies

Jacques

November 2331

New Pav

The planet hung below, all blues and greens and twinkling lights of nascent cities. New Pav, we called it. The Pav’s name for their new home planet was slightly more poetic, but would still sound like a bunch of spitting and hissing to a human ear.

The population had boomed in the seventy years or so since they’d been resettled here, and they now boasted cities on several continents. It looked like the species would survive.

Whether they’d still be talking to us or not was another matter.

I received a signal from the cargo drone containing my manny, informing me that it had landed. With a mental sigh, I prepared to leave VR for what would probably be an uncomfortable meeting with the Pav representative.

I connected to the manny—a remotely operated android—over the SCUT channel and transferred my personal POV into it. As internal systems powered up, I took a mil to glance around the now-familiar cargo hold, then extracted myself from the support rack. The cargo doors opened automatically to reveal my usual Pav military escort, rifles at the ready, probably with safeties off. A gaggle of six-foot-tall meerkats, without the cute. I hadn’t visited in a couple of decades, mostly because the last time had been what you might call tense.

Just to see how they’d react, I smiled, careful not to show my teeth, and gave them the Vulcan salute. The squad leader showed me his teeth—not a gesture of friendship from a Pav—and returned the salute with three fewer fingers.

Apparently, he had studied human culture.

I walked up to the group and gave them a proper Pav smile-equivalent. “Hey, guys, what’s shaking?”

I needn’t have bothered. The squad leader responded with a low snarl and motioned with his weapon toward the nearby tent. They’d set up a tent. It would seem I didn’t even rate an indoor meeting. Maybe it was actually a good sign … nope, couldn’t make that work.

I entered the enclosure and eyed the Pav sitting at the desk. He was the second planetary administrator since Hazjiar, and he didn’t look any friendlier than his immediate predecessor. I missed Hazjiar. She at least had understood the realities of the situation the Pav found themselves in. Somehow, since her passing, the part about the Others having rendered the original Pav home world unlivable had been, um, de-emphasized. The prevailing attitude now seemed to be that we’d done it and lied about it. For no reason that anyone could come up with.

“My name is Da Azzma Hizz,” he said, gesturing to a chair. “I represent all Pav. Do you represent the humans?”

“I am Jacques Johansson. I represent the humans, for purposes of this transaction.” It was a Pav formality, of sorts. Everyone identified themselves and their purpose. And it lowered the tension a bit, as we settled into the routine.

Azzma pushed some papers forward. “We have available the agreed-to tonnages of elements according to the schedule. This represents payment in full for the two human-owned autofactories in our system. Do you concur?”

I glanced over the papers. Everything seemed to be in order. We’d offered to just give the autofactories to the Pav, but they’d refused. I couldn’t be sure if it was an aversion to what could be seen as charity, or if they didn’t want to be in our debt, even morally. I suspected the latter. “I concur. The Bellerophon will be here within the year. They will collect the ingots and deliver the autofactories to you from orbit.”

We stared at each other across the desk. There would be no pleasantries exchanged today. Then Azzma finally spoke. “I will admit this agreement is inconsistent with the prevailing conspiracy theory about the Bobs. It would have made more sense for you to keep us planet-bound and ignorant.”

“Hopefully this will help to ease the tension between our peoples,” I replied.

“A little, I think.” Azzma gave me a tight-lipped smile-equivalent. “I have read the diaries of Hazjiar, Jock. She did not feel that you were the enemy. But it is a minority viewpoint these days.”

I sighed and examined my hands for a moment. “Azzma, you’ll be able to build interstellar vessels with the autofactories. We’ve given you the construction programs as part of the deal. It’s just”—I looked up at him—“you’ll be going out into a galactic neighborhood that’s full of humans, and getting more so. Too much uncontrolled antagonism could be counterproductive, you know?”

He stared back at me for a moment. “I understand, Jock. We are outnumbered and outgunned, if it comes to that. We are not, uh …” Azzma gazed upward for a moment, then smiled. “… Klingons, is that the right human term? We understand discretion.”

I smiled back, just as one of my honor guard muttered, “And patience.”

Azzma gave them a hard glare past my shoulder.

“We have made great strides in restoring the Pav home world,” I said, trying to bring things back to an even keel. “About a third of the planet is actively growing things once again. Are you sure you don’t want—?”

Azzma shook his head. “In our own time, Jock, we will visit our ancestral home. I don’t doubt the skills of the Bobs, but this is the home world of every living Pav. Old Pav is a monument to what no longer is.”

“I understand.” I nodded and stood up. “It will be kept aside for you, for whenever you decide.” I turned to my escort. “Well, boys, shall we?”

The squad leader showed me his teeth—again—and stepped aside to make room for my departure. I turned back to Azzma for a moment and we exchanged Pav head bobs. I found myself missing Hazjiar and her version of the Vulcan salute.

Ephemerals. It was so hard not to think it.



There was a clunk as my cargo drone docked with the comms station. In keeping with the increased use of mannies for local physical presence, stations were now being constructed with a living area of sorts, and docking facilities. I stepped out of the drone’s hold and walked over to the manny pod. For humanoid androids, the pods had pretty much replaced the older and bulkier storage racks. As the pod cover closed over me, umbilicals and feeder tubes attached to the manny. I powered down and transferred my POV to my personal VR.

My latest VR environment, a ski chalet, was already boring me. It seemed I couldn’t stay interested for long in any one theme, and I couldn’t get up the energy to work on something grand. I sighed and reset the VR to the default library theme.

On a whim, I sent a text to Ferb. He replied immediately, and I popped over to the Pav Reclamation Project administration center. The center was hosted by Bill’s moot VR system, and had been the nexus for our efforts to rebuild the Pav home world for almost a hundred years now.

I examined the empty room, a sense of nostalgia filling me. We’d spent so many years working on the problem of rebooting the Pav ecology from nothing more than some plant and animal samples, taken in a huge rush as the Others’ armada bore down on the planet. It was ironic: now that we were finally making some significant progress, the Pav simply didn’t seem to care.

Ferb popped in as I stood, ruminating. “Hey, bud,” he said. “Long time.”

“Yeah. I, uh …” I waved a hand at the room. “Ghosts. It feels like we just abandoned the Pav.”

“Aw, don’t get melodramatic, Jacques. It’s all pretty much automated these days. Takes maybe a couple of hours a month to make sure everything’s on track.”

“Uh-huh. And that’s why, right? Where’s Phineas these days, Ferb?”

He glared at me. “Why’d you have to bring that up?”

“Because it’s the real reason why this place is deserted. Heard from Phineas?”

“Nothing live.” Ferb looked down. “He isn’t bothering to build interstellar relays, and he’s way the hell out of SCUT range now. I get a heavily Dopplered radio transmission every month or so, though.”

“Heading for the Large Magellanic Cloud. He’ll be a while.”

“What’s your point, Jacques?”

“You, me, Phineas, Claude, we’re all haunted by what happened. Ghosts. Billions of Pav—”

“We did everything we could!”

I sighed. “I know, I know. But there’s still an emotional toll. Especially since the Pav haven’t exactly embraced us for our efforts. We’ve all, every one of us who were involved, gone on to other things as far removed from this as possible. Phineas, well …” I snorted. “He’s taken far a bit too far, maybe.”

Ferb nodded, the slightest trace of a smile showing for only an instant.

I cocked my head as I took a good look at him. “What’re you doing with yourself these days?”

“LARPing. Well, designing campaigns more than participating.” Now Ferb finally did smile. “The Gamers—you know, Gandalf and his group—do live-action D&D campaigns in virt. But they kind of have a problem where they all want to play and no one wants to DM, so they’re happy enough for the help. And I, uh …”

“What?”

“I have to admit I get a little uncomfortable around them, sometimes. Not that they’re dangerous; it’s just they’re like strangers, but strangers who all look like me, you know? Some of them are out-and-out jerks.”

“Yeah. Replicative drift. It’s a thing, as Bill says. So why do you work with them?”

He shrugged. “Something to do. Keeps me busy.”

“You can’t find anything better to do with your time?”

“Thanks for that, mom.” Ferb hesitated. “Actually, I’m kind of working on something. Not quite ready, yet. Don’t noise it around, okay?”

He had my interest now. “Okay.”

“I’m building a huge cargo vessel for myself, and I’m filling it with SCUT relays, stripped down to the essentials to keep their size down. When I’m ready, I’m going to launch straight up toward galactic north. I’ll drop off relays as I go. I want to get at least a thousand light-years above the galactic plane. Then I’ll be able to see what’s on the other side of the galaxy.”

“You know you could just put an AMI in the vessel, give it some marching orders, and stay home.”

“Maybe. Not the same, though. Or maybe you’re right about Phineas. And all of us. Maybe we are trying to run away.” Ferb gave me a look that I would have to describe as pleading, as if he was asking for forgiveness or something. “Gotta go, Jacques. We’ll talk again, sometime.”

For some reason, I doubted that would happen. And just like that, I was alone again in the PRP center. Alone with my ghosts.





2. Working the Options

Bob

January 2296

Above Eden

Space is big.

I know that sounds like a duh statement, and Douglas Adams already made it anyway, but when you’re looking for a single spaceship over literally interstellar distances, space gets right in your face with its bigness.

Bender had been missing now for more than a hundred years. Despite Bill transmitting the SCUT plans for FTL communication to every system that Bender could possibly have reached, despite searches along his probable path by Victor and later by his clone-mates Marvin and Luke, we hadn’t found hide nor hair of Bender. Or bolt or deck plate, what with him actually being a sentient spaceship and all.

I should explain that, I guess. Bender is a computer who thinks he’s one Robert Johansson, an engineer slash nerd who died in the early 21st century. As are all the Bobs, including me. I was the first replicant, launched from Earth in 2133. Every single Bob is my descendent, because that’s what Von Neumann probes do. We make copies. We’re up to thousands of Bobs now, spread over an almost one-hundred-light-year radius centered around the Sol System.

Bender was from my second batch of clones, constructed in Delta Eridani. He took off in the direction of Gamma Leporis A, and he’s never been heard from again. Lots of Bobs have died over the years in battles, and some without the benefit of a backup. But Bender just disappeared without a trace and without a reason.

I knew Bender’s original destination, but then so did Victor, Marvin, and Luke, and they hadn’t found diddly. Specifically, they couldn’t find any sign that he’d ever reached Gamma Leporis A. No autofactory setup, no mining activity, no communications relay station, and no Bussard trail in or out of the system.

I had just returned to Delta Eridani after my big pilgrimage back to Earth. It had been an emotionally loaded trip for me—the Earth would probably be drastically altered once it came out of this ice age, so in a way it was my last visit to my home in any recognizable form. It was ironic that humanity had solved the global warming problem by implementing a nuclear winter. And killed off 99.9% of themselves in the process, but who’s keeping score anymore? Stupid humans.

The Delta Eridani system was pretty much as I’d left it. Autofactory support systems continued to collect raw materials from the asteroids, ferrying them back to be formed into ingots against any future need. In the absence of any specific orders, the autofactories slowly produced more autofactories and spare parts for all my various mechanical servants.

Satisfied with the status quo, I invoked my virtual reality system and settled into my La-Z-Boy recliner, surrounded by my library. Shelves full of books, floor to ceiling, never failed to relax me. Spike immediately jumped up and settled herself on my lap, purring contentedly, and Jeeves brought a fresh coffee.

The VR environment was an essential part of my existence. Without it, I was just a disembodied mind. In VR, I had a body, and pets, and a home. And before the addition of the personal VR, four out of five replicants went insane. I’m pretty sure there’s a connection.

“Sorry, bud, but I need to concentrate right now,” I said to the cat. I turned to Guppy, who was standing at parade rest as usual. “Suspend Spike’s program and bring up a representation of the stellar neighborhood, centered on us, radius forty light-years.”

Huge fishy eyes blinked.

[Acknowledged]

Spike disappeared in a scatter of pixellation. A moment later, a sphere appeared before me, filled with numerous points of light, all conveniently labelled. All the star systems within forty light-years of Delta Eridani, categorized by stellar type.

I drew a line with my finger from Delta Eridani to Gamma Leporis A, Bender’s presumed flight path. He’d taken off in the right direction, back in 2165, but had never reached the destination. The options were foul play, misadventure, or deliberate decision.

The first two explanations might leave some kind of trace—debris, cross-trail of some theoretical attacking force, radioactivity, whatever. The third would at least show up as a redirected Bussard trail. But to detect any of those alternatives, I’d have to be crawling along at 5% of C. That would require 320 years to completely scan Bender’s projected path. Of course, if I found something, I wouldn’t do the whole route, but it would still be a whole lot of not very much for a long time.

We’re immortal, being computers. But we also operate at millisecond resolutions, so several hundred years would be an eternity to me.

Now, back to the third option—deliberate decision. If Bender had noticed something and turned to investigate it, perhaps someone following his path would see the same thing. Luke and the others hadn’t noticed anything, but they had probably been closely scrutinizing their own course rather than looking around. Bender, facing a long interstellar jump in pre-SCUT days, would have been looking for something to cut the tedium.

I tapped my chin for a few milliseconds, working through the options, then turned to Guppy again. “I think I need to attack this from all angles. Have the autofactories build a hundred or so of those long-range scouts we used in the battle of 82 Eridani. Make sure their SURGE drives are powerful enough for interstellar travel.”

[Acknowledged]

Once the drones were ready, I would send them along Bender’s projected path at 5% C, looking for anything unusual. Meanwhile, there was no reason for me to wait around. I treated myself to one last long look at the planet Eden, rotating below me, then left orbit, heading for Gamma Leporis A at 5 G.



Travel between stellar systems is uneventful—thank God. It’s hard to think of something eventful out between the stars that wouldn’t leave me as a cloud of free-floating atoms.

I considered limiting myself to 0.75 C so that I could continue to interact with the Bobiverse in general. SCUT allowed instantaneous communications over BobNet, but if my tau got too high (or too low—there was some argument about how we should be expressing tau), I wouldn’t be able to interact in real time, even frame-jacked. But I was just too impatient to test my theory, and anyway the Bobiverse was starting to get weird and cliquish these days. Bobs were getting less Bob-like, and going off in directions that I think would have left Original Bob baffled. Well, if they hit the singularity or something while I was out of touch, hopefully Bill would leave a note with instructions.

I passed the time by reviewing my archived surveillance vids of the Deltans. A primitive race of humanoids, the Deltans resembled a sort of bipedal pig/bat mashup. I’d more or less adopted them and become the great sky god for a generation or two, before joining the tribe in android form. It had been 63 years since I’d walked out of Camelot for the last time, after Archimedes’s funeral. I desperately missed my friends and the feeling of family that I got from living among them. Bill had scolded me on more than one occasion about the dangers of transferring my affections to a bunch of alien primitives. Well, tough.



As it turned out, things got interesting before I even got up enough tau to drop out of touch. About two months subjective time into the voyage, something triggered one of the monitoring scripts that I’d set up.

We were playing baseball in the Bobmoot VR when a Guppy popped in unannounced. Every Bob on the field stopped dead. Having someone’s Guppy show up in the moot couldn’t be anything but interesting. Metadata indicated that he was mine, so I put down the bat and gave him a raised eyebrow. As usual, he completely ignored it. Facial expressions didn’t mean much to the GUPPI interface. Or sarcasm, metaphor, irony, body language, or social conventions, for that matter. Guppy stared back, waiting for me to say something.

“Well?”

Apparently, that was enough.

[Astronomical monitoring has picked up an anomaly. You asked to be advised immediately.]

Anomaly, to Guppy, could mean anything, though. Mario’s Guppy had once reported an entire dead planetary ecosystem as an “anomaly.”

Luke and Marvin rushed over and hovered. They knew I was following Bender’s trail, and this might be news.

I glanced at them, then said to Guppy, “Elaborate.”

[System Eta Leporis displays unusual infrared signature, together with periodic dimming of the star’s light.]

Luke and Marvin exchanged a glance, then Luke said, “Like a Dyson Swarm signature? You think there’s some sort of megastructure? Bender would have investigated that.”

By now most of the field was gathering around us. Baseball was doubtless done for the day, an opinion that Bill shared. “All right, guys. I think we’re done. I’ll waive the five-inning minimum for this week. To the pub!”

The players gave a ragged cheer, then began to pop out of the baseball VR.

I dismissed Guppy, then transferred to the pub VR with Luke and Marvin and signaled the resident Jeeves for my usual.

We grabbed a table, and Luke glared at me. “Okay, talk.”

“Hmm, well, you guys know I’ve been scanning for anything unusual around me as I follow Bender’s original flight path. My theory is that he saw something and changed course, and we’ve just been unable to pick up the faint bend in the Bussard trail.”

“Yeah, yeah. Get to the punch line.”

I gave Luke a smile that said I’m going to draw this out as much as I can and continued. “Granted, I had no idea what Bender might have been watching for, and what he might have seen, so I’ve been basically looking for everything I could possibly imagine. I’ve had to double Guppy’s memory so he could keep up.”

“And you found a megastructure signature?”

“I appear to have found something that could be interpreted that way. The question is, do I commit to a course change to investigate? If it turns out to be a false alarm, I’ll basically have to almost start over from Delta Eridani. Forget the time required to circle around—eventually, between all our follow-up trips, we’ll have trashed up the interstellar medium so much we’ll never learn anything.”

“I think you have to, Bob,” Marvin said. “If it comes down to it, I can order the Delta Eridani AMI to build a new Heaven vessel and matrix, then I’ll clone myself into it. That’ll be faster than you circling around or one of us heading over.”

“Fair enough. Give me a second.” I popped back into my personal VR. Guppy was, as usual, standing at parade rest. For the millionth time, I wondered if I should retire the Admiral Ackbar image. And for the millionth time, my juvenile sense of humor balked.

“Turn us to head for the anomaly, Guppy. Let me know estimated travel time when you’re done. Low priority, don’t pop into the moot for that.”

[Acknowledged.]

I popped back to Marvin and Luke, to find Luke tasting my beer. “Hey, boundaries, guys!”

“What, I’m going to give you germs?” Luke grinned at me. “That’s a pretty good red. I was a little surprised, since I remember us as a mostly dark-beer drinker.”

“Blame Howard. Vulcan has a thriving beer industry, and Howard keeps transferring the templates into VR. He introduced me to this last time I visited.”

Marvin nodded slowly. “He’s setting up interstellar trade routes.”

I frowned. “With transit times of years? You can’t—”

“Turns out you can, O great all-father. Stasis pods are highly effective for preserving beer.”

I glared at Marvin, both for the correction and the glib dig. “I thought he got rid of his interest in Enniscorthy Distillery.”

“He did. Gave it all to Original Bridget and Stéphane. And her kids inherited it when she died. But Enniscorthy specialized in hard spirits. Remember the Great Romulan Presidential Scandal?”

The thought made us all laugh. Cranston had deserved every bit of what was done to him, and had never been able to come up with any evidence that Howard engineered the whole thing.

“Howard and Bridget bought up a few microbreweries on Vulcan,” Marvin continued, “and it would seem they have some kind of natural talent for the creation and marketing of the devil’s brew. Or maybe just good business sense. They’re now one of the three biggest breweries in the Omicron2 Eridani system.”

“Hmmph.” I tapped my chin with a finger as I thought it through—a nervous tic that I seemed to have developed all on my own. Original Bob had never done that, nor did any of my clones. “Well, you can’t print liquids, and there’s no point in emailing the recipe without having the actual ingredients available, so I guess physical exports are the only way.” I raised my glass in salute. “Here’s to Howard, the family entrepreneur.”

I glanced around the pub as I slowly sipped my beer. There seemed to be a lot more variation in dress and style these days, and the clumps of Bobs had a tendency to match, as if we were self-filtering by fashion sense. I could swear that some of them were just short of cosplay. Oh, there were no Klingons or Chewbaccae strutting around, but some of the clothing was reminiscent of TNG uniforms or Jedi robes. There was even a Bob in a suit and tie. Why in God’s name would anyone voluntarily wear a suit and tie?

I frowned and tilted my head in the direction of the suit, glancing at Marvin. He replied with a baffled smile and a shrug. “Don’t ask me, Bob. Replicative drift seems to be accelerating. I think we’re approaching fifteen to twenty generations, and it’s no longer just a matter of enhanced or suppressed attributes of Original Bob. The differences are accumulating, and some clones are going in completely new directions.”

“Uh-huh. And the almost-cosplay outfits?”

Marvin’s bemused expression didn’t change. “Some of those are probably just for fun. Or making an ironic commentary. But the rest, well, I’m not sure if the clothes are influencing the attitudes or the other way around. The TNG guys are talking about forming an actual organization in the vein of Starfleet to monitor—that’s the word they’re using—the Bobiverse’s effect on biologicals.”

“Oh good grief. And how are they going to do that? Pass laws? Create a police force?”

“I think it’s just discussion, Bob. No one is actually pushing for organizational changes. At least not yet.”

“Is this anything to do with Thor and his lobby group, after the war with the Others?”

“Not really, no. Thor and his group were stating their preferences, not trying to impose anything on the rest of us. This”—Marvin made a small gesture toward the TNG guys—“has a more intrusive feel about it, if you get my drift.”

I shook my head, refusing to give the matter any more psychic energy. I raised a hand and Jeeves appeared with another beer.



I popped into my personal VR, sporting a pleasant beer buzz and a not-so-pleasant feeling of foreboding. I dismissed the beer buzz, but couldn’t do the same for the foreboding. Bill was right that I didn’t go to moots often enough, but today’s revelations hadn’t been the kind of thing that would encourage me to do so.

I had recently added an outside patio to my library, complete with deck furniture. The weather was perpetually late summer/early fall, with warm sun and a cool breeze. Loons called across the lake, competing with geese and other waterfowl. Sighing with contentment, I settled into a lounge chair, then invoked Guppy. “Fire up Spike and Jeeves, please. Then update me on the course change.”

Jeeves appeared at my elbow with a pot of coffee and some small sandwiches with no crusts. Spike appeared on my lap, right where she’d been when I suspended her program. I scratched the cat’s ear and she began purring.

Finally, sandwich in one hand and coffee in the other, I was ready for business. “Status?”

[En route to Eta Leporis. Travel time approximately 35 years, including time required to change direction.]

“Wow, that’s a hike. Will we be in SCUT range when we get there?”

[Negative. It will be necessary to construct and deploy an intersystem relay station.]

Crap. More wasted time. Well, it couldn’t be helped. I wasn’t about to do a side-hop to some nothing system just to build a communication station so I could still access BobNet. Of course, if Eta Leporis had no suitable raw materials when I got there, I was going to look pretty foolish.

“All right, Guppy. Send orders to the trailing drones to adopt a minimum-time flight plan to get to where we changed course. I want the whole area mapped in detail, looking for Bussard-trail spoor.”

[Acknowledged. They will require approximately 24 months.]

“Noted. Let me know when they arrive and start mapping, and give me the completed report as soon as it’s received.”

Guppy blinked huge fish eyes and disappeared. I settled back into my La-Z-Boy and put my hands behind my head.

First problem: communications. I could—maybe—build a communications relay station when I reached Eta Leporis and send it back along my route to the halfway point. That was suboptimal, though. Beside the uncertainty of materials availability at my destination, I’d be out of touch for years. More years, I mean.

Instead, I could direct the Delta Eridani autofactory to build a full-sized relay station with a SURGE drive and send it out. That would be faster, since I could get it started immediately, but this option would still leave at least some gap during which I’d be incommunicado.

To handle that gap, I could take one of the drones in my hold, modify it to act as a SCUT relay station, and drop it off en route with orders to decelerate to zero velocity. It wouldn’t be ideal; no repair or upgrade capability, for starters. And not a lot of bandwidth, with the size limitation. Well, I wouldn’t be running any moots from Eta Leporis anyway. I could live with that. And I could stock it with some spare roamers in case of breakdowns.

Anyway, it only had to operate for a couple of years, until the much larger and more powerful station from Delta Eridani was in position. And investment of equipment was minimal. I had enough spare drones and roamers in my hold for basic necessities.

Okay, one problem solved. I queued up the required tasks on my TODO. Next, the Bender problem …

Item: There was a good chance that Bender had veered off and headed for Eta Leporis. But if that turned out to be wrong, I’d receive the report from my trailing drones long before I got there. I’d let Marvin know, and be able to swing around to pick up the trail again. So for the sake of argument, consider that a given.

Item: Eta Leporis displayed characteristics suggesting a spacefaring intelligence lived there. One that had built or was building a megastructure. That thought brought back memories of the Others. I shuddered at the possibility of another protracted interstellar war.

Item: If you accepted that a spacefaring civilization had built some kind of megastructure and Bender had changed course to investigate it, then it was highly probable that something had happened to Bender in Eta Leporis. Otherwise, he’d have built a space station, which would be transmitting his logs back toward human space via radio by now. He’d also have long since received the SCUT plans and already be on BobNet thanks to instantaneous communications.

Conclusion: Caution is highly indicated.

I chuckled at the dry bureaucratese in that statement. Still, it was true. We normally approached a system at a tangent rather than diving straight for the star. But we retained enough velocity to turn in-system in minimal time. Maybe a parking orbit in the Oort would be a better first step this time. And heavy use of exploration scouts. Not cloaked, though—cloaking interfered with SUDDAR, our subspace version of radar.

I rubbed my eyes with thumb and forefinger—an action that had no real point in VR except that it felt good—and started an inventory of onboard assets. I would have to do some in-flight manufacturing. Wouldn’t that be fun!





3. Trouble

Bob

September 2331

Outskirts, Eta Leporis

I came to a stop, relatively speaking, more than fifty AU out from Eta Leporis. The definitions of Kuiper and Oort regions were completely arbitrary, especially for a system other than Sol, but there were some practical differences. For instance, matter became increasingly scarce farther out. And metallic deposits became harder to find. The physics of stellar system formation seemed to produce some consistent patterns, one of which was that the heavier elements tended to be closer in, and all the ice and frozen gasses congregated farther out. In the Kuiper and Oort zones, it was almost all frozen clumps of condensed gasses ejected from the inner system when the sun ignited. But, like raindrops, they generally condensed around something.

My first task would be to send scouts out to look for useful materials. This part fell within my original design. A Von Neumann probe needed to find raw materials, refine them, and use them to manufacture more Von Neumann probes. Of course, I’d long since exceeded my original design specifications. But it was still relaxing, like doing a routine and mindless task.

This process would take a while, though, which was making me antsy. After years in interstellar space, it might seem odd to be fretting over a question of months. But I’d been frame-jacked way down for most of the trip, I was here now, and I wanted to get moving on my search. And, not to put too fine a point on it, I wanted to see if there was really a megastructure in the system. The Others’ Dyson Sphere was the only other piece of mega-engineering we’d ever seen, and that had been only partly constructed. That the Others might be here seemed unlikely, but it would certainly be a worst-case scenario.

My current orbit was too far out to resolve anything in the inner system with the onboard telescope. That was frustrating, and my immediate urge was to send in some observation drones. But Bender had probably just gone charging in, and that presumably had not worked out well for him. So, like it or not, a slow, careful exploration of the system was in order.

I spent the time deploying my printers and setting up a proper orbital autofactory. Regardless of what I found in the system proper, I would still have to set up a local communication station. In my idle moments, I checked my message backlog. It was huge, after a few decades out of touch. But I was mostly interested in messages from my trailing drones. I filtered for those.

The drones launched from Delta Eridani after I’d left had indeed found that Bender’s trail turned toward Eta Leporis—and only a fraction of a light-month before the point where I made that same turn. The fact made me feel more confident about my deductions, and about my plan of action. And slightly smug.



It took four months to locate enough material to even make a start on my plans. Transport drones brought mined material back to the autofactory, which slowly churned out finished parts according to the schedule and plans that I’d given Guppy. Roamers assembled drones from the parts and slowly constructed the relay station.

A year after arriving, I finally had enough exploration drones to begin the actual search for Bender. In all that time, I hadn’t contacted anyone, other than having a couple of email exchanges with Bill. First, because I didn’t want people breathing down my neck, demanding constant updates. And second, because with the small temporary relay station, all I would be able to manage would be audio and video streams. BobTime? FaceBob? It didn’t sound likely to catch on.

I ordered local drones to trace an expanding spiral, looking for Bender’s trail into this system. The cross-section they had to examine wasn’t all that big, not for devices with a four-light-hour detection radius.

And finally, success! Bender had reached here, and Bender had apparently entered the system. I plotted his approach vector and assigned some drones the task of following his flight path.



The closer I got to possibly finding Bender, the more excited I got. But at the same time, I became more nervous. The whole history of our interactions with the Others kept coming back—unpleasant surprises, Bobs getting blown up … Hal got blown up by them, what, twice? Three times?

I didn’t want stories to be told around VR campfires about the demise of Bob-1. But if it did happen, I wanted the other Bobs to know. So I found myself reluctant to commit to anything that might put me in danger until the day the interstellar relay station came online.

It had taken a little longer than expected for the Delta Eridani autofactory to construct and deploy the station, and the delay was maddening. But finally, the day arrived when the new station signaled readiness and came online. I mothballed the kludgy drone/relay station, checked my bandwidth, and performed a long-overdue backup to Bill’s monster Epsilon Eridani archive, Ultima Thule.

I held off on updating my blog. I wanted to have something dramatic to post first.

I’d been doing some light astronomy while waiting for the autofactory to build things and for the drones to find things. I had already identified six planets, the second of which was in the habitable zone. I’d also identified a gap between the second and third planets, which was where the infrared signature was coming from. I couldn’t resolve anything in that zone, and the signature was coming from all the way around the star, so my money was on some kind of swarm—possibly the beginnings of a Dyson Swarm, but concentrated in the ecliptic. If that was the case, and the swarm consisted of something in the order of O’Neill cylinders, it would make sense that I wouldn’t be able to make out any detail yet.

The planet in the habitable zone, Planet 2, didn’t appear to be inhabited. Or at least there wasn’t any kind of radio signature. Nevertheless, I was getting something sporadic from the system in general. Like chirps—very short-lived and seemingly random noise, except for the narrow transmission spectrum. Which was exactly what I’d expect to see if someone was encrypting and compressing their communications. So something was alive.

It might be time to rejoin the Bobiverse. I could use some other perspectives on this.



The blaaaat of the airhorn was answered by the traditional booing, as the audience expressed their love. Bill grinned back from the podium. “Yeah, yeah. Okay, today’s meet includes an update from Bob-1”—Bill was forced to wait for a wave of catcalls and cheers to die down—“on the subject of Bender, and the situation in Eta Leporis.” This produced a silence far more profound than the earlier noise. Bender’s disappearance had become the Bobiverse’s version of the Flying Dutchman legend.

I waved my hand in the air and smiled as heads turned to look at me, but I was perplexed. The Bobs have always been irreverent and disrespectful, and I was no stranger to jeers and insults at moots. But this time it hadn’t been just good fun. There had been a discernible undertone of rancor.

Keeping my expression neutral, I stepped up onto the podium and scanned the crowd. Undertone or not, everyone was paying attention. “I’m sure most of what I’m about to tell you is already circulating as scuttlebutt, so I’ll keep it brief, then answer questions.” I gave them the same capsule summary that I’d already shared with Bill, then asked for questions. Hands went up everywhere and I pointed at random.

“Are you just going to go barreling in without any thought of consequences?”

My eyebrows went up in surprise. The tone and the words were deliberately confrontational. I took a second look at the speaker to make sure he wasn’t a non-Bob replicant, but no such luck. I found myself more irritated than I would be if some random person had challenged me. This felt like a betrayal.

“Have you ever known a Bob to go barreling in without any planning? Have you met us?” I glared at him, daring him to argue.

“If this does turn out to be a native civilization, you could be interfering in their development. Will you confirm that you’ll back off to avoid doing that?”

“Wow,” I replied. “Nice use of a prejudicial term. To answer the actual question rather than the accusation, that will depend on circumstances. Signing on to a blanket policy at this point would be ridiculous. At one end of the scale, this putative civilization might have deliberately shot Bender down; at the other end, they might only have noticed the flash as his reactor exploded. Those two scenarios require different responses.”

“Or you could just leave them alone. Prime Directive, dude.”

I squinted at the Bob, trying to pick up his metadata. Okay, squint isn’t the right word in VR, but it feels the same. Strangely, he’d set his info to private, which struck me as intolerably rude. And that produced a moment of bemusement—why would I do something to me that I would consider rude?

I glanced at Bill, who just shrugged. I turned back to the speaker. “Even if we had laws, dude, which we don’t, the Prime Directive wouldn’t be one of them. That was a plot device, and unrealistic.”

“Don’t be too sure of that. Some of us are rethinking your attitude.”

“It’s Original Bob’s attitude,” I retorted. I found myself getting more and more irritated with this pissant, and made a concerted effort to calm down. “But you have the right to whatever opinion you want.” I pointedly turned to another hand and motioned.

“How far will you take the search, if you don’t find anything in this system? Will you ask for volunteers to help look further?”

“As far as necessary, and yes. He’s one of us, for God’s sake.”

“So it’s going to be another crusade mandated by the senior Bobs, and the rest of us are supposed to just go along?”

I turned my head and sure enough, it was Pissant. I decided it was time to take a stand. “Nice straw-man, jerk-off. What happened to you, got a quarter-dose of brains? And by the way, we’ll continue this when you have the guts to show your name, but not until.” Again I turned away.

The altercation appeared to have taken the air out of the room. There were no more questions. If this followed normal Bob-like behavior, though, people were just waiting for the formal moot to be over, so they could talk one-on-one. And that was fine with me. If Pissant came at me again, I’d blackhole him.



The moot was over, and most of the Bobs had gone back to their own private VRs. I sat in the pub with Bill, surrounded by empty tables.

“So what the hell, Bill? Mind filling me in?” I glared at him for emphasis over my beer.

“You’ve been out of touch for a few decades, Bob. And I understand why you’ve been keeping to yourself. The whole Archimedes business would be several emotional kicks to the crotch for anyone. But you’re missing things. The Bobiverse is evolving. We’ve got some Bobs here that are twentieth generation and more. Replicative drift is becoming significant enough that some of these Bobs really only look like you. And for that matter, there’s a lot more playing around with appearance, and I don’t just mean facial hair. A half-dozen or so Bobs have started walking around as full-time Borg.” Bill appeared momentarily embarrassed, then invoked a Cone of Silence over us. That was jarring to me. Normally they were used to cut down on distracting background noise, but Bill’s action was, in this case, intended to prevent eavesdropping. “Honestly, Bob, if you haven’t changed your encryption keys and passwords since your last cloning, you should really do it, just on principle. I already have. I don’t actually distrust anyone yet, but I’m beginning to recognize that one of these times we’ll run into a descendant who thinks the ends justify the means, you know?”

I nodded and sent a text to Guppy to do just that, and immediately.

“So what about Howard and Bridget?” I asked, more or less changing the subject. “And Henry Roberts?”

“Neither Bridget nor Henry has cloned. In the former case, that has produced a lot of disappointment and some grumbling in the Bobiverse. Which is probably a good part of why she hasn’t. She doesn’t want to be seen as the default all-wife, I think.”

I snorted. “Original Bob was pretty progressive, but I can still see a certain implicit expectation being a problem.”

“Yup. Anyway, Henry doesn’t show up here much. He’s sailing Quilt right now.”

I raised an eyebrow. “Wait, what happened with Poseidon? Did he finish early?”

Bill laughed. “He gave up after he got eaten the third time, ship and all. He says there wasn’t much point anyway. If you’re going to sail, you should be sailing to something. Poseidon, well …”

“Yeah. All ocean, no something.”

“Bridget and Howard continue to catalog all life in the cosmos,” Bill continued with a smile. “Despite, you know …”

“The infamous Prometheus expedition.” I shook my head. “Well, they’re never bored, anyway.”

I hesitated, not sure how to continue. A couple of Bobs came over, detected the Cone of Silence, and veered off to find other conversational partners, or possibly just a beverage.

Finally, I decided that trying to beat around the bush with Bill was pointless. “So, getting back to replicative drift. What was with the nameless mouthpiece? Are we getting political parties now?”

“It’s a little more than that, buddy. Bobs in general have always been a herd of cats, but it’s getting both more and less pronounced. Bobs are forming groups, and some of those groups are tending to the bizarre. There’s a group trying to build a Matryoshka Brain, for instance.”

“Uh …” I drew my head back and frowned. “With the Casimir power source, we don’t need—”

“The central star for power. Yeah. But heat management is heat management, and a gravity well is handy for keeping things organized. My understanding is that they’re building it around a gray dwarf. Anyway, I’m more concerned about them creating something straight out of a Vernor Vinge novel.”

“Or Lovecraft.”

Bill chuckled and dismissed the Cone of Silence. “Anyway, Bob, you should read my blog to get caught up. I don’t pull any punches, so you’ll get a good overview of where the Bobiverse is going.”

I nodded and raised my glass in salute. Bill turned to someone who had been waiting to get his attention, and I went looking for Luke and/or Marvin.

I couldn’t suppress a snort as I scanned the gathering. Bobs as Borg now.

Cthulhu would not approve.



Bill was probably right. I’d done my usual turtling thing and effectively cut myself off from society in general. I needed to fix that, and I might as well start with a visit to Will. He had, according to his blog, finally retired from colony administration at 82 Eridani and gotten himself a place on Valhalla, where he was involved in the ongoing terraforming of the largest moon of Asgard. The air on Valhalla was still a little thin for humans, but a manny wouldn’t care.

I pinged Will and in short order received an invitation and address for a guest manny. I took the address and popped over.

A few milliseconds of diagnostics, and I opened my eyes to find myself on an outdoor deck, looking up at a sky more of a mauve than blue. Hanging in the middle of the expanse was Asgard, looking perhaps three times the size of Earth from Luna. Will was sitting on an Adirondack chair, holding a coffee and grinning at me.

He wore the standard Bob Johansson manny, but no longer sported a neat Riker-like beard. His hair was uncombed and stuck out in random spikes, and the beard was more like what you’d get if you simply stopped shaving. The manny, so called because the early models had resembled department-store mannequins, was dressed in something that was closer to a lumberjack outfit than anything else. I knew without looking that my guest manny would be generic human and hairless, although not cadaver-white like Howard’s first version.

I undraped myself from the support rack and sat across from Will, then attempted to materialize a coffee out of habit. He grinned at the expression on my face and motioned to a side table, where a coffee flask and some cups were set out. “Sorry, Bob. Out here in real, we prepare our coffee the old-fashioned way.”

I smiled back at him. “In real?”

“Language marches on,” Will said. “Nowadays it’s real and virt.”

“Huh. Noted.” It took only a few seconds to get my own coffee, then I raised the cup in salute. “You’ve changed your look a little.”

“I’ve felt a need to distance myself from the old Riker persona, for a lot of reasons—one of which is that I had a hard time getting people to stop coming to me with colony-related problems. They couldn’t accept the idea that I had retired. Once I adopted the mountain-man look, I think they got the message.”

“So how is the retired life?”

“Retired just means I don’t have a job description, and I can work on what I want now. I’ve been spending most of my time on the terraforming of Valhalla and some personal projects. It helps that I live here; I can see the results of changes right away.”

“And how’s that going?”

Will waved a hand in a self-deprecating gesture. “Bill did a lot of the pioneering work on Ragnarök, of course. Cleaning up the air, adding water, adjusting the biosphere—Valhalla actually has a native ecosystem. Bill made most of the mistakes. I just avoid those.”

“Are you losing much in the way of native stock?”

“Surprisingly, no. It was a fairly hostile environment when we started, kind of like being up the side of a mountain in the high latitudes. What we’re doing to the moon is making life easier. Warmer, more oxygen, more water, and so on. Our challenge is to introduce Earth stock slowly enough that the native stuff doesn’t get outcompeted before it adapts.”

I nodded, took a sip of coffee, and flinched. In the still-too-thin atmosphere, water boiled at a lower temperature, so coffee prep was negatively affected. The coffee was lukewarm and thin. But that was the price you paid for running a manny in, uh, real.

I looked at Will over the rim of my cup and changed the subject. “Listen, I already talked to Bill about this, but I wanted to get your perspective on things. About the moot the other day.”

Will grimaced. “I wasn’t there; we were having a problem with one of the fractionators. But yeah, I heard about your face-off with Morlock—”

“Morlock? He named himself Morlock?”

“Nah, he named himself Jeremy. Which might be coincidence or might be a subtle nod to that Time Machine remake. But he goes by Morlock these days.”

Will raised an eyebrow at me, inviting comment. I gave him a small head-shake, and he continued: “Replicative drift is turning out to be a real thing. Bobs are recognizably one of us until about fifteenth generation or so, then the drift begins to accelerate. We haven’t had any out-and-out psychos yet, but we’ve definitely got some assholes.”

Well, so much for visions of a galaxy-wide race of Bobs. Still, diversity might be a good thing. After all, the human race consisted of billions of individuals and had still managed to …

Almost obliterate themselves. Crap.

This was a problem. A big problem. Original Bob’s hands-off approach might not cut it in this case.

I opened my mouth to reply, just as a message from Guppy imposed itself on my field of view.

[In-system scouts have been attacked. 100% casualties.]

I barked “Gotta go!” at Will, and popped back into virt. I quickly texted him an apology for not reracking the manny and promised to explain later.

“What’s going on?” I said to Guppy.

[Telemetry is queued up for inspection.]

I grabbed a few video windows and started playback. The drones were coasting along Bender’s trail, SUDDAR ensuring that they didn’t lose it, when the transmission from one of them abruptly disappeared. The second one cut off a millisecond later, before even the AMIs could react in any meaningful way. The third, though, took a glancing blow or near miss or something. It was disabled, but managed to reconfigure SUDDAR and get a low-res scan before that signal also disappeared.

The fourth window contained the results of that scan. Two craft had approached unnoticed from the scouts’ five o’clock and unleashed some kind of attack. They were about twenty feet long, most likely automated, and clearly not intended for atmosphere. A skeletal structure composed of girders or beams formed the base shape, onto which were bolted various pieces of equipment with no concession to style. What had to be beam weapons were bolted onto opposite corners, and communication dishes took up the space at ninety degrees to the weapons.

I took a look through the logs and couldn’t find any indication of approaching missiles. There was, however, a brief temperature spike just before the signals cut off, which confirmed the beam weapon hypothesis.

“Lasers. Interesting choice. Not generally a good combat weapon.” I stared at the window for a moment longer, then closed it. “Guppy, why didn’t the scouts detect their approach?”

[SUDDAR was concentrated forward in order to resolve the Bussard trail, which had been diffused by in-system gravitational effects.]

Okay, fair enough. In interstellar space, a trail would be virtually undisturbed for centuries. Not so much once you got inside the heliopause.

“We didn’t get a SUDDAR pulse from them?”

[Negative. Telemetry from the last scout detected radar pulses.]

“Radar? They use radar? Who uses radar these days?”

[Apparently, they do.]

I glared at Guppy, and not for the first time made a note to do some black-box testing on him. Sarcasm required self-awareness, and not once had a buster or drone ever given me this kind of back-talk.

Still, the basic facts remained, and shone a light on something that I mostly managed to forget: I was not a military thinker. I’d gotten too comfortable after successfully dealing with Medeiros and the Others, and had behaved stereotypically. And gotten my butt handed to me. It was time to resurrect some of that good old-time paranoia and start thinking defensively.

“Well, that’s just peachy. And they just attacked without warn—” I stopped as I had a thought. Guppy had a bad tendency to not volunteer information. Attempts to change his behavior had just resulted in huge dumps of irrelevant data. I still wasn’t convinced that wasn’t passive-aggressively intentional. “Guppy, did the attackers do anything besides ping us with radar?”

[Affirmative. There were several radio transmissions.]

Probably challenges, either to determine friend or foe, or even if the scouts were something other than flotsam. And I didn’t know the proper response. So no real help there. In fact, if we’d responded, it would have alerted whoever that there was someone else in the system. Which might also be a bad thing. Just ask Hal.

So, caution was still indicated.



I invited Bill over to take a look at the video records. He tapped a spot on the video window. “That’s interesting. You see that?”

“Mmm, yeah. Fusion torch. Great for acceleration and maneuverability. But hard on fuel.”

“Over the short haul, they could probably outpace you, Bob. Best be careful.”

“Hmmph.” I sat back in my La-Z-Boy. “Not that I’m planning on going in and introducing myself. That’s two encounters, two attacks, and one lost replicant.”

“Some assumptions in there.”

“Reasonable ones. Enough that I’d need some evidence to the contrary before I’d change my mind.” I reached over and scrolled the window forward a fraction. “No SUDDAR, no SURGE, no SCUT. They, whoever they are, haven’t discovered subspace theory. On the other hand, their fusion drive tech is impressive, and if I’m right about them having used lasers, so is their weapons tech. That’s a lot of wattage out of a drone that small.”

“Which means their fusion reactor tech is probably better than ours.” Bill grinned and shrugged. “Not surprising. No one uses fusion reactors anymore.”

True. We’d long since switched to the Casimir power source that we’d gotten from the Others. It was far superior to any kind of fusion reactor, for reasons including but not limited to a complete lack of detectable emissions. Naturally, work on fusion technology had subsequently stagnated, but no one cared.

“So …” I tapped my chin in thought. “These, uh, whoevers have perhaps continued development in more traditional directions, and may have surpassed us in some other technologies as well. While being totally deficient in others. Their drone designs reflect that.”

“Fair summary. How about Boojums for their drones?”

“Sure, why not.”

“So what’s the plan?”

“Plan? We don’t need no stinking plan.” We both grinned. “Seriously, at this point I’m only up to don’t get caught. It’s a little nebulous after that.”

“We have designs in the archives for evading radar detection, you know.”

I stared at Bill for a moment. “Jeez. I must be getting old. Okay, so, some kind of radar-proofing, carbon-black exteriors to foil visual, low-power electronics combined with a super-cooled heat sink to counter infrared detection …” I sat forward as my enthusiasm mounted. “We can coast in, we don’t need to use cloaking since they don’t appear to have SUDDAR. So we can use long-range SUDDAR to watch for patrols … yeah, this is good!”

“Now you’re cookin’. Do you have enough trajectory data to plot Bender’s probable location?”

“Within a huge margin of error, yes. I’ll send some more scouts the long way around to look for where he might be by now. Or his remains.” We were both silent for a moment as we processed this thought in parallel.

“Sounds like you’ve got some work to do, Bob,” Bill said. “I’ll leave you to it.”



Some work to do meant some engineering design work to get the combination of attributes that I wanted, based on plans and notes on BobNet. Whatever else the wars with the Others and Medeiros may have done, they greatly accelerated battle-related technologies. But hasn’t war always done that?

The engineering was no big deal. I am, after all, a computer—even if I don’t acknowledge it most of the time. The actual construction work, well, that was going to take longer. I still had to do everything out in the Kuiper/Oort interface, and there was still no miraculous cache of handy elements to make my life easier.

The one new piece of tech I added was a core of ice at a couple of degrees Kelvin. The scouts were designed to be ultra-low-power, which meant very little heat generation, but I didn’t even want that to show. Waste heat would be transferred to the ice core, which would gradually warm up. I had calculated the heat transfer rate, and I was pretty sure the scouts could make it through the system before their heat sinks gave out and they started to radiate significant infrared.

On the downside, to keep within the heat budget, they wouldn’t be able to maintain continuous contact. That meant I could conceivably lose them and not know it until they failed to report in. Well, life isn’t perfect.

I calculated trajectories and times and launched the scouts myself via rail gun. Ballistic all the way, baby. If they had to maneuver, that would be the end of the heat sink. If all went well, it would be months before they sailed out the other side.

By the time I’d done this, the other scouts had made it all the way around the system and were running a search pattern on Bender’s expected location. I’d told Bill the margins of error were huge, which meant a large volume to search, but I was still disappointed by every day that went by without result.

For no other reason than to have something to do, I set myself a course to the other side of the Boojum system. The long way around, though. I still wasn’t prepared to fly through the system, even a little bit. I had no idea how far out the Boojums patrolled.

I was about halfway around when Guppy made my day.

[Scouts have found something.]

“Cool! What do they have?”

[Something.]

That black-box test was going to be done with no anesthetic. And soon.

“Give me the report.”

A window popped up in front of me, replete with all kinds of statistics and measurements. The most important item, though, was an image of a shredded section of a Version 2 Heaven vessel.

Bender.





4. Collection Run

Herschel

October 2332

New Pav

I watched on the monitor as the drones chivvied the ingots into the hold. As each massive block of metal arrived, roamers wrapped it in cable netting and carefully winched it up against a wall, then tied it down. We’d have raw materials for just about any project we cared to take on—for a long time.

The deal Jacques had struck was certainly efficient. Because Neil and I had been running around from system to system for the last fifty years or so, we had not had much opportunity to stop anywhere and stock up. And in any case, the residents of those systems would not have been happy with us poaching their natural resources.

We’d contacted the Pav on the way in. The kindest description I could give for their attitude would be curt. I guess Jacques was right about them. The thought made me sad; overall, we hadn’t been having a lot of luck with alien species. Between the Others, the Pav, and the Deltans, I was starting to wonder if it was outright impossible for mutually alien intelligences to get along. And if the local area was at all representative, there must be a lot of intelligences out there. Eventually, we’d run into another starfaring species with a technological advantage. That made war—and possibly the extermination of humanity—statistically inevitable.

I shared my thoughts with Neil, who was, as usual, draped over his chair sideways. “Jeez, Hersch, that’s gloomy even for you. You need a new hobby. Or a hobby at all.”

“Har de har. But what’s wrong with my logic, Neil?”

He sighed and was silent for a few mils. “Nothing, I guess. So what do you want to do about it? We’re still pond scum.”

“Nah, we haven’t been that for almost eighty years. We own and operate the biggest damned cargo ship in human space. We are personally responsible for setting up at least five colonies. I think we have some street cred.”

“Yeah, I guess so,” he replied. “And please don’t take that as permission to do a Picard impersonation. I don’t think I can take it anymore.”

“You got it. So what can we do with all that cred?”

Neil pursed his lips and stared into space. “To be honest, my first thought when we got word about this windfall was to double our mover-plate count and accelerate to beat hell for somewhere interesting.”

“Like Ick and Dae? And Phineas?”

“And at least a dozen others. A lot of Bobs are just taking off, Hersch.”

“Seems kind of, I dunno, self-absorbed. I was thinking more like trying to place a human colony well outside of human space.”

“In case you turn out to be right.”

I gave him an apologetic shrug. “We still have all the stasis pods from the Great Exodus. There’s simply never been any reason to off-load them anywhere. And that’s the thing. There’s no more reason for the pods. Or for the Bellerophon, really. We’re obsolete.”

“So to make ourselves relevant again, we try for another colony. And if we used the ore to add another thirty-two plates, we’d be able to push some really stupid G’s,” Neil said, warming to the subject.

“So a human colony out in, say, the Perseus arm—”

“Would ensure continuity, even if the rest of humanity ran into a bigger, badder Others.”

I nodded. “Now all we have to do is figure out how to locate some volunteers.”





5. Investigation

Bob

November 2332

Outskirts, Eta Leporis

A cloud of wreckage slowly revolved around a common center of mass. Some of it was recognizable; most was not. I was a little surprised that there was much of anything—I wouldn’t have expected a laser to leave much more than slag. Of course, I was assuming that whatever attacked Bender used the same techniques as the drones that attacked my scouts.

I would know more once I arrived. It didn’t make sense to have the drones try to collect all the detritus and bring it to me. That would take too long and carried too much danger of losing or further damaging something. Instead, I’d fly in with my complement of roamers and do a close-up inspection. But first, I set the exploration drones to watch for any approaching Boojums, even though it seemed unlikely that they’d take a sudden interest after letting the wreckage drift unmolested for so long. The fact that the wreckage was drifting away from the system was probably relevant. But if I’d triggered any alerts with all the activity, they might change their mind.

I fully admit that I crossed the distance a lot more quickly than I should have. Caution, for the moment, was taking a back seat. Fortunately, I didn’t run into Boojum pickets. Even more fortunately, I didn’t run into an asteroid.

I set the roamers loose to examine the wreckage. It quickly became obvious that what I’d suspected was true—an internal explosion had ripped Bender’s ship apart. Most likely the laser had taken out the nuclear reactor control system in such a way as to make the reactor fail catastrophically. I remembered my first encounter with Medeiros, in Epsilon Eridani, so many years ago. He’d suffered that very fate. In addition, the meltdown had taken out his matrix. I had to hope that Bender hadn’t come to a similar end.

It was an entirely different ship design, of course. Medeiros was riding a military ship designed by the Brazilian Empire. They considered even their human soldiers expendable, never mind a replicated intelligence. Bender was riding a ship that I’d redesigned, with special attention to keeping the replicant matrix safe. This bit of simple self-interest gave me hope.

Outside inspections complete, the roamers entered the section of ship. I had multiple windows up, trying to watch everything at once. Finally, I gave up trying to maintain my VR. I dismissed my library and frame-jacked. Now I could keep up with everything, and putting up with naked floating data windows was a small price.

One of the roamers bleeped for attention. I turned to the window, and would have smiled if I currently had a body. The roamer had found the replicant matrix containment, in the most heavily armored section of the ship. And no obvious damage.

Then elation was replaced by horror as the roamers opened the containment … to find it empty.

No, not empty. Worse than empty. Not only was the replicant matrix missing, but all of the interface hardware had been carefully removed, probably as a unit. This was not good. Someone had made a point of removing Bender and his support hardware in a way that implied an intention to study and possibly revive him. I remembered Homer, and cringed at the specter of Bender, helpless and subject to torture.

One thing was for sure, though—the Boojums, or their makers, knew that someone else was around.

Having found Bender’s empty ship, I had now flip-flopped from panicked rush back to paranoid caution. I wasn’t going to hurry anything, I wasn’t going to take any chances on attracting the Boojums or, well, running into an asteroid. The flight back to the autofactory area would take most of a week.

I had one quandary to deal with, meanwhile. Would I make an announcement now, or wait until I knew more? Could I even keep quiet for a week? For that matter, would Will be able to keep his trap shut? I hadn’t actually asked him to, although I was sure he would wait rather than steal my thunder.

Screw it. I pulled up my console and began writing a blog entry. I had a large following anyway, being the first Bob replicant, and I could be pretty certain that Luke and Marvin would be watching every post.

It took a few full seconds of thought to get the tone right. Cautious optimism, mixed with a realistic appraisal of possible issues. Hope, but be prepared.

Finally, it was done. I hit post, then sat back and waited. 3…2…1…

Luke, Marvin, and Bill popped in at the same time, all talking at once and waving their arms. I turned in my office chair and waited until the noise died down.

“Why yes, I’m free right now. Come on over,” I said.

“Bite me,” Marvin replied. “Where is he?”

“Well, that’s the sixty-four-thousand-dollar question, isn’t it?” I materialized chairs for everyone, and Jeeves entered with coffee.

“Dammit,” Marvin muttered. “Dammit, dammit …”

“What’s the next step?” Luke asked. “Do you have a plan?”

“Nothing concrete, yet. I guess the first step is to find the Boojum base, or source or whatever. There’s a good chance Bender will be there. Hell, we can just fly in and SUDDAR the hell out of it, if it comes to that. Locate Bender’s matrix, then go from there.”

“A raid?”

“If that looks like the best plan.” I stuck my chin out. “If someone has kidnapped Bender and is experimenting on him, I’m not sure diplomacy will be my first choice.”

“Easy there, Bob,” Bill said. “Let’s see what we find before we start building bombs, okay?”

“Yeah, I know. Don’t worry, I’ll be circumspect.”

There followed one of those silences where no one quite knew what to say. Finally, Marvin nodded and he and Luke stood. They gave me a wave and popped out.

Which left Bill.

“So, number two, what’s up?”

“Oh, ha ha. Listen, I wanted to ask you just how you plan to go in-system looking for the Boojums, and how public you’re going to be about it.”

“Public? What the eff? Are you saying there’s any question?”

“Of course not, Bob, not from me or any of the others in our generation. But Starfleet is agitating—”

“Starfleet? What?”

Bill sighed. “You still haven’t read my blog yet, have you?”

“Uh, no. Sorry, been busy.”

“Remember Morlock? We’re calling him and his group Starfleet now, because of their obsession with the Prime Directive. It’s become gospel to them. They don’t even want us to keep interacting with humans. They’re trying to generate support for a formal declaration of some kind that you should leave whatever you find alone.”

“Is a formal declaration anything like a law?”

Bill snorted. “We don’t have laws. But if enough people got together, they could apply social pressure of some kind.”

“What, like shunning?”

“Well, something like that, in principle. A loss of prestige, anyway.”

“For God’s sake, Bill, Original Bob never gave even a small fraction of a rat’s ass about that.”

“Yeah, I know, but more and more Bobs are becoming less and less Bob-like. I’m starting to call them replicants, in fact, instead of Bobs, just to make the distinction.”

“And they’re more concerned about prestige?”

“Given a random walk, you can’t very well drop below zero rats’ asses, but you can increase the value arbitrarily. So, yes. We’re getting more replicants who are, for want of a better word, joiners. They’re forming mutual-interest groups for all kinds of things.”

“Like Starfleet, and the Borg.”

“Mm-hmm. And the Skippies—”

“Skippies? Skippies?” I could feel my eyes bugging out, even in VR. “What, they’ve changed their avatars to beer cans and started calling people monkeys?”

Bill snorted his coffee and had to take a moment to compose himself. “No, it’s the group trying to build the Matryoshka Brain. You know, singularity, super-AI, and so on? I don’t know who started the nickname, but the Skippies haven’t complained yet. They also, by the way, want us to leave the humans alone. But in their case it’s because they think the humans are holding us back from our destiny or some such.”

“Are there any other—no, never mind, I’ll read your blog. Goddammit, I go away for a few decades and the whole place falls apart.” I grinned at Bill. “I have some catching up to do, apparently.”

“There’s an understatement. Let me know if you need anything.” Bill gave me a nod and popped out.

Interesting times, indeed.





6. The Search Expands

Bob

May 2333

Outskirts, Eta Leporis

I sat in my library, blearily gazing at the table in front of me. Will, Bill, and Garfield watched me silently, the occasional slow head shake the only commentary offered. Every once in a while, I took a half-hearted sip of my coffee. Bill finally couldn’t take it any longer. “You do understand you’re in virt, right? You can just dismiss the hangover, right?”

I responded with a pasty half-smile that was probably more terrifying than reassuring. “Yeah, and in the future I’ll do just that. There’s no metric in which this is enjoyable. But after finally reading your blog—well, Original Bob was by no means an alcoholic, but he did occasionally, when it was called for, go on a, uh …”

“Bender. Did you make that whole speech just to deliver that line?”

I chuckled, then groaned and held my head. “No, it was just a bonus. But goddammit, Bill. We are diverging. Nothing bad, yet, but I think you’re right in expecting it. And we actually have a Bobbi now?”

“That’s just a rumor. I don’t know of anyone who’s met her. But really, that’s inevitable too.”

I sighed and considered doing a reset and dismissing the hangover. It had served its purpose, whatever deep psychological need for self-flagellation was involved. But now my curiosity was up. “This feels pretty real. Verisimilitude in VR—uh, virt—has really been improving.”

“Part of that’s the mannies, of course,” Will said from across the room, where he was nursing a soft drink. “Once we started experiencing things in real again, we realized how granular and synthetic the virt experience actually was.”

“It helped that humanity was back on its feet by then. We had actual experts to ask about some of the finer points.” Bill waved his cup in a vague out-there gesture. “Like Bridget, for instance. She’s ferociously competent in the biological sciences, and, naturally, highly motivated now to help with the improvements. And with SUDDAR scans, we can accurately map how the human body and brain respond to various stimuli. Like taste and other senses.”

“And hangovers.” I grinned, then winced again. “She and Howard live almost full-time in real, right?”

“Yup. And raising kids as well. I’ve lost count of how many they’ve adopted over the years.”

“Well, here’s something to chew on,” Garfield said. He’d been silent up to this point, so we all turned to him. “And it’s important if you want to maintain perspective on your place in the cosmos.” He paused for dramatic effect. “As replicants, we never get tired, we have near-perfect memories, we can process hundreds of times faster than humans, and we have instant access to all the information available in our archives. But we aren’t any smarter than Original Bob was. And reading about something isn’t the same as being trained in it. You can’t become a doctor by reading Gray’s Anatomy, for instance. Or watching it.”

I frowned. “Okay, I get that in principle, but how is it important?”

“We can’t do everything ourselves. For instance, without Bridget, the androids wouldn’t be anywhere near as advanced as they are. We’ve improved our weapons by talking to military types—”

“Or stealing from them,” I interjected.

Garfield glared at me for the interruption. “We’ve become a sort of society unto ourselves, but for the most part we’re still doing the things Original Bob was interested in. We’re a monoculture. Specialists. And that’s not healthy.”

“So you’re saying …” Bill raised an eyebrow at him.

“That I’m not sure replicative drift is a bad thing, necessarily.”

“Gar, I don’t trust some of the new replicants,” Bill said.

“Nor should you. They’re different people. But the Bobiverse needs to be robust enough to handle a society where not everyone’s priorities align. Sure, we need to be more worried about security and such. How is that different from locking your house or your car, though?”

“That does it,” I said. “This conversation is incompatible with a hangover.” I did a reset and felt better immediately. “Does this mean we’d accept other humans as well?”

Bill shrugged. “We’ve always been willing to do that. But we’ve gotten no takers. At least none who’ve decided to deal directly with us. Those that have chosen to go with replication have signed with companies that offer shared processing in a large computer facility. The bigger the monthly fee, the more processing power and extras you get. There are options like manny connection ability, and even premium manny models available only to the highest-paying clients. Most of them, though, are just spending their afterlives engaged in full-time virt.”

“That doesn’t make sense. This is freedom. The best kind of freedom, where you can do what you want, with no reliance on anyone else.”

“Not really, Bob. That sounds good to a loner like Original Bob, but to a lot of people it would be the opposite of attractive. Among other things, self-reliance means having to be responsible for everything yourself. Much easier to just pay someone to take care of the details, if you have the money. And remember, this is immortality for a copy of you, at the expense of permanently destroying original you.” Bill paused, then shrugged in dismissal. “On the other hand, there has been a lot of interest in postmortem corpsicle storage in real, and in fact, companies have been springing up all over the colonies, offering to warehouse people after death, just like with Original Bob. Except now they use stasis pods, so there’s nothing irreversible about it. And they’re doing a booming business.”

“Because when you come back …”

“It’ll be original you. Yeah. Much more attractive option.”

Will sighed. “Except for people like Justin, who have a religious objection.”

We commiserated in silence for a mil. As the “face of Bob,” Will had been especially close with our relatives for decades. Julia’s death, then her son Justin’s, had hit him every bit as hard as Homer’s.

Bill continued, “And it doesn’t help that for years we were rushing all over the galaxy, saving humanity’s butt, dying in space wars, and generally acting as dragon fodder. The idea of being a replicant never really recovered from the negative perception of ending up as a disposable servant.”

Garfield pointed a finger at me by way of emphasis. “Don’t forget, too, that the governments of the day were characterizing replicants as non-human copies. Automata. No rights, and so forth. A lot of that stuck.”

I nodded. “And are they bringing any back? The corpsicles, I mean.”

“Yes. A significant number have been revived when their condition became curable, thanks in large part to Howard and Bridget’s cancer foundation. Most of the remaining corpsicles are up against the limits of gerontology. They still haven’t conquered aging. At some point, replacing cloned organs becomes a game of Whac-A-Mole, and when the brain starts going, well, there’s no longer any point.”

“Then there are the other Bobiverse projects. The Skippies’ Singularity Project makes a certain amount of sense, but some of the others …” I paused. “Silkies? Like van Vogt’s Silkies? Jaegers? Space Dragons?”

Garfield laughed. “Remember when Marvin was trying to replicate the setting for every book he’d ever read in VR? Turns out he was thinking too small. The groups you’re talking about are trying to replace our standard spaceship hulls with something more, er, imaginative.”

“We’ve been making glib comments about being homo siderea now. I guess some Bobs have taken the concept and run with it.” Bill grinned. “I’ve subscribed to their blogs. It’s harmless stuff. The Singularity Project, maybe slightly less so. Starfleet, a lot less so, especially if they decide to do more than just talk.”

This last comment cast a pall on what had been a very interesting conversation, and an uneasy silence reigned for several mils.

I finished my coffee with a final gulp. Time to get down to business. “Very interesting. But speaking of interesting, there’s the small matter of a megastructure or something to look at. Shall we?”

“Hear, hear,” Bill said, and I transferred us all to the control room. In virt, it was nothing but a change of visuals, but Original Bob had always been obsessive about detail, and we early generation replicants shared that attitude. The control room had wall screens and consoles, with a very science-fiction-spaceship-ish tone. The only proper venue for exploring a new stellar system.

“So what do we have?” Bill said, stepping up to the holotank.

“The ballistic scouts will have completed their sweep through the inner system, and we should have a complete picture,” I said. “System planets first, Guppy.” Bill, Will, and Garfield all glared at me in tandem. I was stalling; they knew it, I knew they knew it, and so on. But my VR, my rules.

The holotank showed six planets, consisting of three gas giants farther out and three rocky planets considerably farther in, with one in the habitable zone. The large gap between planets two and three was glaringly obvious. “That spacing doesn’t look natural,” Bill said.

I nodded. “Way too asymmetrical. Either planets have been moved to make room for the megastructure, or planets are missing.”

“The Boojum makers will most likely have originated from the second planet,” Will said. “What do we have?”

[No chlorophyll lines. Minimal oxygen lines. No radio traffic. No indication of organics at all.]

We turned to stare at Guppy. The last time we’d seen a planet with those characteristics, it had been Pav. Afterward.

“The Others? Isn’t this outside their range?”

[Others attack is unlikely. SUDDAR readings indicate significant metal concentrations.]

Good. If the Others had hit this system, the metals would have been mined out.

“Let’s finish looking at what we’ve got. Then, unless there’s a good reason otherwise, I’ll send some scouts in under power to get a close-up look.” I turned to Guppy. “Smaller bodies?”

[None. This system has been swept clean.]

“What, not even moons?”

[No moons.]

“Wow,” Bill said. “Someone has been busy.”

“Let’s set that question aside as well,” Will said. “Right now, we have two options: one, we can look at the megastructure data, or two, we can beat the crap out of Bob.”

“Can we do both?” Bill asked.

I grinned at them. “My money’s on a Dyson Swarm.”

“Pretty thin one,” Bill said. “No solar shading at all.”

“Beat. The. Crap,” Will growled.

I laughed. “And now, the moment we’ve all been waiting for.” I nodded to Guppy, and he updated the holo image.

We stared, for what might have been entire seconds. Finally, Will said, “What the actual fuck?”

Bill flickered for a moment as he frame-jacked, probably checking the archives. He was back before I could react. “Topopolis.”

“It looks like spaghetti,” Will said. “Or a wire sculpture.”

I checked the schematic on the monitor. “That is one continuous cylinder, fifty-six miles in radius, stretching three times around the star, wound around itself in a sort of helical shape.”

“Torus knot,” Bill interjected.

“How is that even possible?” Will asked, ignoring Bill’s correction.

Bill shrugged. “It was discussed back on Earth, in Original Bob’s time. There’s relatively little information on the concept. Apparently, it wasn’t as popular as O’Neill cylinders, Stanford tori, and Bishop Rings. But it doesn’t require particularly advanced technology. Just large-scale effort and brute-force engineering.”

“What about gravity?”

“It’s essentially an O’Neill cylinder millions of miles long. It spins around the minor radius to generate artificial gravity.”

“But it’s curved!”

Bill smiled at Will’s outraged complaint. “Think about the scale, bud. If the strand has a mile of bend for every million miles of length, you wouldn’t even have to put in expansion joints. That’s less than a tenth of an inch flex over each mile of length. The structure would flex less than the Golden Gate Bridge when a single pedestrian walks across it.”

“But where would they get the material—oh.” Will nodded. “Missing planets.”

“On the grand scale of things,” Bill mused, “this is less impressive than what the Others were trying to do.”

“Except the Boojum makers didn’t invade other systems to get materials.”

“We don’t think,” I said, glancing at Bill. “I haven’t exactly done a survey.”

“If they don’t have subspace and SURGE drives, it seems unlikely,” he replied. “But that’s another question in abeyance until we have more information. So what’s our next step?”

“Good question,” I said. “This shoots down my earlier plan to just scan the Boojums’ home base for Bender’s matrix. We can’t scan over a billion miles of complex structure looking for one individual cube of optoelectronics, while dodging Boojum attacks.”

“Especially if the Boojum makers use optoelectronics for their own stuff. It’d be like looking for a specific needle in a haystack, where the haystack is all needles.”

“Yep. Okay, we’ll have to be a little more deliberate with our approach. First, we need to gather information.” I ticked off items on my fingers. “We want a close-up look at the planet, we want a close-up look at the megastructure overall, and we want a scan of the interior detail.”

“And we want to not get blown up.”

“That too.”

Bill snapped his fingers. “Speaking of military technology—”

“Which we weren’t.”

Bill glared at me. “I’ve been working on a variant of something I got from the USE—it’s a fractal surface that absorbs ninety-nine percent of radiation that hits it, and re-radiates it as infrared.”

“Great for radar, not so good for infrared.”

“But we have your heat-sink idea. Get rid of the heat that way instead.”

“Hmm.” I nodded. “Under power, we’d have a limited time before the heat sink failed. We’d have to choreograph this very tightly.”

“Yup. So dress up a cargo drone in this fractal surface, complete with heat sink. Fly to Planet Boojum, drop off some planetary exploration drones, accelerate for the outer system, and hope to make it out before the heat sink is saturated. Do the same with some hi-res drones and drop them off near the structure.”

I glanced around the room. No argument was forthcoming. “One last thing. We need more information on topopolises, uh, topopoli? Topopoleis? Maybe there’s a human expert on the subject of megastructures. Can someone look into that?”

“I can do that,” said Will, and he popped out.

Bill stood. “I’ll get the fractal surface details to you.” He popped out.

“I’ll work out the drone design,” said Garfield, and he popped out as well.

“I’ll have another coffee,” I said to the empty room.



The autofactory drones had been locating and retrieving raw materials from the Kuiper belt and Oort cloud for a couple of years now, so logistics were no longer quite as much of a limiting factor. Bill and Garfield had their info to me within hours, and soon I had my autofactory churning out modified drones at full speed.

Still, there were some significant mods, and the fractal camouflage was a pain to get right.

But a week later, I had all my spy devices ready. I double-checked the calculations, sacrificed a coffee, and let fly.

“Now we wait,” said Bill.

“Like we haven’t been doing that for the last forever or so,” Garfield grumbled.





7. Looking Forward

Will

June 2333

Virt

The search for information on topopoleis turned out to be one of those good news/bad news things. Good news: I’d found an expert. Bad news: he was dead. Good news: he’d arranged to be replicated. Bad news: he’d gone right back to work and was really hard to get hold of. The whole Keystone Kops act would be giving me a headache if I were still subject to such things, so I decided to take a break and do some work on a personal side project I had going.

I pinged Conan and popped over as soon as I received a response. Conan was the current Bob rep in the Omicron2 Eridani system. It hadn’t been a heavy-labor position for a long time—Vulcan and Romulus having long ago become independent of our help—but we had always maintained a physical presence, for our family’s sake if nothing else.

I looked around as I settled in. Conan appeared to have replicated the Vulcan jungle, with his home in a treehouse. I smiled to myself. I knew enough about Vulcan’s wildlife to realize this was completely unworkable in real life. Even without the now-extinct Cupid Bugs, there was still more than enough variety—of the bad kind—in the wild to kill any human dumb enough to be out without an exo-suit.

Conan saluted me with a can of Coke. I sat in the nearest chair and, there being no Jeeves in view, invoked my own can.

“What can I do for you, O great ancestor?” Conan said.

“Are you one of mine?” I replied, and he nodded. Ancestry had never been a big deal in the Bobiverse, but with all the fragmenting lately, people were starting to pay more attention to chains of instantiation, with an eye to cataloguing behavioral DNA. As with a lot of Bob projects, it was ad hoc and casual.

“I’m concerned about the family, Conan. FAITH has been getting more influential on Romulus the last couple of decades, and that can’t be anything but bad news.”

“I get it, Will. But a lot of people like the sense of certainty that religion gives them, and FAITH is all about nice, easily packaged black-and-white answers. Even if they’re factually wrong.”

I waved a hand in dismissal. “I frankly don’t care what the justification is. I want our family out from under. We’ve seen the rise of the Far Right too many times in the last half-millennium to not recognize the signs.”

“Okay. And?”

“I have a small side project going on. I want to set up a society with an innocuous name like Outward Bound or something, for people who want to emigrate from this system. If you have the time, I’m hoping you’ll take care of the setup and admin.”

Conan grinned. “This hasn’t exactly been a pressure-cooker job. Howard started divesting us of responsibility as soon as he could, and we’ve continued with that tradition. I’m more like a local ambassador than anything.”

“How’s that working out lately?”

“Yeaaaaaaaah … I’m curtailing my appearances these days.” Conan made a deprecating gesture. “Bobs are not their favorite people, even on Vulcan, never mind Romulus. So as it happens, I have lots of free time. Any specifics?”

“Nothing complex. We just need a legally incorporated society, no special requirements, board of directors, et cetera. I’ll email my family contacts once you have it set up, then we’ll go from there.”

Conan nodded. “So you’re forming a prospective colonial group composed exclusively of Johansson descendants?”

“Not exclusively. Not even predominantly, if we get enough interest. But I want as many of ours out of here as we can manage.”

“FAITH might step in. They don’t have the clout right now, but by the time you’re ready to shove off …”

“Yeah, I’ve been thinking about that, too. The constitutional guarantees, plus the original documents of agreement they signed with me back on Earth, will establish the legal requirement to let the colonists go. We need to be ready, though, if they decide to go for brinksmanship. Let’s talk about in-system assets that are still Bob-controlled.”

Conan smiled and popped up a graphic. Almost as if he’d been expecting this.





8. Survey Results

Bob

July 2333

Outskirts, Eta Leporis

Will, Bill, and Gar were in attendance, in anticipation of some useful returns from our scout drones.

Orbital mechanics being what they are, the drone destined for Planet Boojum arrived first. We were a little concerned about the possibility of deceleration attracting attention from the Boojums, but finally decided that A) there was no reason to expect them to be more interested in powered objects in particular since they’d cleared the system of everything, and B) we didn’t have much choice.

In any case, the drone settled into a low orbit around Planet Boojum with no issues or incidents, and ejected all its scouts.

It was immediately obvious why there was no sign of life. This was a dead planet, and not by natural means. The panorama below us combined the worst of an Others attack with Earth’s fate at the hands of humanity. There had very clearly been an exchange of nukes. Blackened, blasted circles where cities might once have been were still putting out enough radiation to forestall any possible misinterpretation. Impact craters indicated at least some orbital bombardment, although nothing as big as what the Brazilian Empire had used on Earth.

The planet hadn’t spiraled into nuclear winter, but even so, there was no indication of living vegetation. Large swaths of what might once have been forests were burned to the ground, with not the slightest trace of new growth.

Finally, I reached forward and turned off the big monitor. I said to Guppy, “Let me know if anything anomalous shows up. Otherwise, record and archive everything, then recall the scouts and leave the drone in orbit for now.”

[Acknowledged]

I pulled up the data stream from the other cargo drone, which was slowly pulling up to the megastructure. The scale of the thing was such that you could only see one “thread” at a time. The other two loops were so far away as to be invisible.

“So, what I want to do,” I said, “is spread the SUDDAR scanning drones along the length of the megastructure so that we get a full scan of a long segment, with enough overlap so we don’t lose any detail. I’m going to assume that whatever stretch we pick at random is going to be representative of the structure as a whole.”

“Seems reasonable,” Will replied.

We settled back to wait for the drones to reposition themselves. I still had some concern about the Boojums. They hadn’t bothered us yet, and we had some pretty good countermeasures for non-SUDDAR detection methods, but I didn’t know if they might have an A game or something for guarding the perimeter of the topopolis. Although, common sense would tell you to keep watch farther out and not let anything get this close in the first place.

Anyway, the drones reached their assigned stations without any fuss. Bill and I gave each other simultaneous thumbs-ups. This was the moment of truth.

“Okay, Guppy. Start with full-reach scans for each drone, then cut the range in half with each subsequent scan until we’re down to a two-mile range, which should be enough to scan the inside surface. Then start taking snapshots every second until we have a full revolution recorded.”

[Acknowledged. Scan results coming up.]

“It, uh, doesn’t actually look like it’s rotating,” Will said. “Are you sure about your assumptions?”

I grinned back at him. “I did some reading. A lot of the design choices for O’Neill cylinders will apply to topopoleis as well. Chances are there’s an outside shell that doesn’t rotate. It will be thick and designed to absorb micro-meteor impacts and high-energy radiation. You don’t want that much mass loading the rotating section, so the much thinner but structurally stronger inner shell will rotate, giving simulated gravity on its inner surface. There will be magnetic bearings or some such between the two shells.”

“Say, you know a lot about this thing for not having scanned it yet.”

“It’s all theory, Bill. Let’s see what we’ve got.” I turned to Guppy and nodded.

There was no dramatic change to the monitor window, but smaller data windows began stacking up in various locations. We watched the action for a few milliseconds, then I reached over and tapped one of the scans. The window expanded in front of the main monitor, and Bill and I leaned forward to examine it in detail.

“You were right about the shells,” he said. “Inner one is generating …0.86 G.”

“Which is exactly the gravity on the second planet,” I replied. “So that’s the Boojum makers’ home world.”

“Air’s not even close.”

“Are you surprised? The pounding, the fires, and no life to provide homeostasis … Nothing could live on Planet Boojum the way it is right now.”

“I guess not. When will we be able to get a detailed scan of the inhabitants?”

“Not until we’re down to the rotational snapshots. Let’s just leave it running.”



We sat around the control room, variously drinking coffee, beer, or Coke. I looked askance at the glass in Will’s hand. He smiled back. “Picked up the habit from Marcus. Sometimes, something cold and fizzy is a nice change.”

There was a ding reminiscent of a microwave, and the phrase Scans Complete popped up on the monitor. We all quickly stood and hurried over to examine the results.

The next few seconds resembled what you’d get with any gaggle of scientists trying to outshout each other, but we eventually distilled some useful information.

I stared at the hologram of a native. It was more like an Other than a Pav, in that it didn’t closely correspond to any Terran lifeform that I could think of. Will examined it, head cocked to the side, and declared, “There’s a bit of otter in there, I think.”

“A flying otter.” Garfield blinked. “Or a flying squirrel?”

“Uh, flying otter is reasonable, if you ignore the head,” Will added. “Or maybe giant beaver? Look at the tail. That thing looks like it fans out.”

We stared for a few more moments. To me, it looked like a four-foot-tall fat otter, but with a flap of skin around the forearms that could open or close. And a snout that was almost a beak, but with teeth. Like something between a platypus and a wereduck. The tail did seem to be able to fan out, or flex flat or something—going from a roundish appendage to something more beaver-like. The creature was covered with fur, which tended toward a rich chestnut brown.

“Snarks,” Garfield said. “If we have Boojums, we need Snarks to make them.”

I held up a hand. “Sure, but only until we find out their name for themselves.”

“Assuming we can pronounce it.”

“It’s aquatic,” Bill said after some more silence. “The forearm things and the tail are for pushing through the water.”

“That explains the river,” Will added, and we all nodded. One of the many interesting aspects of the design was that a river ran the entire length of the section we’d scanned—and that was more than a hundred thousand miles. Or rivers, depending on how you counted. It branched and merged constantly. It was possible that the river system ran the entire length of the topopolis.

“Interestingly,” Will continued, “the way the river loops and splits and meanders, no part of the inner surface seems to be very far from water.”

“Given the natives’ biology,” Bill replied, “that was probably a design requirement.”

We gazed in awe at the pictures and schematics, then Garfield said, “Where would you get all the water? The overall structure is literally a billion miles long.”

Bill froze for a moment, then turned to Garfield. “Earth has, or had anyway, about 330 million cubic miles of water. The river in the topopolis averages maybe a half-mile wide and a tenth-mile deep, so if it was straight you’d probably only need about fifty million cubic miles to fill it. Soil can also be up to twenty-five percent water, so depending on how deep they’ve layered real soil over the shell’s inner surface, maybe you add another hundred million cubic miles. It’s still less than what Earth had. And there’s always the Oort cloud if you needed more.”

Garfield bobbed his head a few times as he absorbed that. “And the materials to build it?”

“The Earth contains about 90 billion cubic miles of iron. To build this, based on the cross section we see, you’d only need 20 billion cubic miles, although of course you couldn’t use steel—not nearly enough tensile strength. Most of this structure is constructed of some kind of ceramic reinforced by a 3D carbon fiber lattice similar to what we use for our ship hulls, so even that estimate is probably way high.”

“But the point,” Will added, “is that you can get all the material you need by taking apart one Earth-sized planet.”

“Which probably explains the orbital gap between planet two and three,” I finished.

“Umph,” said Garfield. “So, what now?”

“Well, we have well-established and tested procedures for picking up culture and language surreptitiously, thanks to Jacques,” I said. “Although he had physical access to bookstores and libraries on Pav. I’d like to move things along as fast as possible, but without direct access, we’re going to be at a disadvantage.”

Bill frowned. “We’re going to have to send in spy drones.”

I nodded. He had hit the nail right on the thumb. “Yeah, and that’s not going to be a trivial undertaking. Then we have to wait until we’ve absorbed the language and culture before we can go in.”

“Is there an alternative?”

“What about just using spy drones? I mean for the search for Bender, not just for the cultural absorption?”

Will shook his head. “I can’t see that working. They either fly around a lot where they can be seen, which is bad, or they stay in hiding and don’t get around much. Which is bad. Plus, it becomes very difficult to ask questions of the locals.”

“Excuse me, sir or madam,” Garfield said. “I am not alien spy device, despite appearances. Could you please direct me to the nuclear wessels?”

We all laughed. Gar’s Chekov impersonation was spot-on.

After a moment, I nodded to Will. “All right, accepted. I know this will sound odd after Bill’s comments about keeping a low profile, but I’ve been talking to some people over at the Singularity Project—”

“You’re talking to the Skippies?” Garfield asked.

“Yeah. They don’t have an AI yet, but they do have a generalized, self-programming Expert System with enormous processing power. I wanted to be ready to fast-track the language translation and android design work if we found sophonts.”

“Wait, androids? You’re thinking way ahead on this,” Garfield said.

Bill looked at me with a rueful smile. “You’re looking for some help from them on that, too?”

I gave him a tight-lipped smile in reply. “They think they can pick up a lot from SUDDAR scans, including possibly sound—”

“What? How?”

“It’s the same principle as bouncing a laser off a window to pick up vibrations from sounds inside the target building. You demodulate the reflection …”

“SUDDAR doesn’t work that way.”

“No, but the Skippies think that they can use it to pick up vibrations from rigid surfaces in the megastructure. Even glass, assuming they have it.”

“That’ll be pretty hit-and-miss. You’d have to do a lot of scanning for the small number of situations where that would be feasible. They’re willing to take this on?”

I nodded. “They’re isolationist, but not like Starfleet. They don’t think contact with humans is a morally bad thing, just that it’s holding us back. Presumably by forcing us to keep conforming to human culture and so forth, I guess. But they are neutral on the question of interference with any locals, so I figured it would be relatively safe. Of course, if Starfleet gets hold of it, they’ll go ballistic. But really, what can they do besides scream loudly? They aren’t here, they can’t get here in less than a couple of decades, and I have control of the local hardware, so they won’t be building local ships or androids.”

“And honestly,” Will added, “if they started using strong-arm tactics, I don’t think it would go well for them. As a group, Bobs aren’t tolerant of that kind of thing. They’ll register their disapproval, we’ll acknowledge their right to their opinion, and that’ll be that.”

“Well, we have enough scans for a first pass at a rough android design, but a lot of work ahead of us on the culture and language fronts. Starting with how we get in.”

“Yeah, I don’t want to cut my way in. To be honest, I’m not sure if that’d even be possible. There have to be some legitimate entrances, for supplies, or personnel, or maintenance equipment, or something.”

“Internally, there will have to be a ring of some kind between the inner and outer shells, to allow matching the rotation for things going in, and removing the angular vector for things coming out. A Spin Transfer system. We should look for that kind of structure in the scans.”

“Maybe it’s time to just have a detailed look at what we’ve got.”



Several dozen milliseconds later, the party atmosphere had evaporated. A bristling silence hung over the group, and we all wore matching frowns. “I presume everyone has noticed the level of technology of the inhabitants.”

“Or lack thereof,” Bill replied.

Garfield poked at a window in front of him. “Or the fact that the interior entrance we did a close-up on appears to be sealed off so the inhabitants can’t leave.”

“Something smells.”

We now had a couple hundred thousand miles’ worth of point scans and a thorough rotational scan from three locations. The results were perplexing. Instead of modern metropolises, we were seeing what appeared to be villages, constructed mostly of some kind of wood-equivalent, mostly concentrated around the river. Smaller settlements were situated around tributaries and branches. There was very little in the way of metal, as well. In fact, most of the metal seemed to be in the form of small disks carried around by the locals. Money.

I tapped the image to call attention to a detail. “We’ll need to do some more scans to confirm, but it looks like the land is sculpted rather than the product of any kind of natural erosion. Either the water for the streams and tributaries is pumped up to the source, or they have actual weather to supply the headwaters.”

“Also,” Bill pointed out, “the inside seems to be divided into segments of about five hundred and sixty miles in length, separated by mountain ranges that form a ring to divide each segment.” He tapped an image and it zoomed. “We don’t have enough detail, but I think those mountains also anchor stays or guy-wires to keep some kind of cylinder lined up down the center of the structure.”

“I’m guessing that central cylinder provides illumination. There’s no allowance in this design for letting the actual sun shine in.”

“Probably true, but SUDDAR hasn’t been able to pick up those kinds of detail. And if you’re right, it brings up the issue of heat dissipation. I wonder how they handle it?”

“I think we have at least a partial answer to that,” I said. “There are radiator surfaces along the entire shaded side of the outer shell. Which are radiating way more heat than can be accounted for by solar absorption, so there’s a lot of heat being generated internally. Probably that lighting you’re talking about. There must be a system to bleed the heat from the living area to the outer shell.”

Everyone in the room nodded slowly in appreciation. Bobs loved technical solutions.

“And notice,” Bill added, “the river’s meandering pattern repeats every dozen segments or so. I think the landscape does as well. I guess they just used the same design templates over and over.”

“They might even have built the megastructure in segments of that size then glued them together.”

“A billion miles. That’s almost two million segments.”

We all stared in silence at the data windows for several milliseconds.

“Maybe,” Bill mused, “we just happen to have scanned a section of the megastructure that’s set up as an agrarian community. There’s no reason for the society to be identical along the entire length of the topopolis. Maybe they’re technologically backward by choice.”

“Including blocking the exits? That seems incompatible with a voluntary return to the land, you know?”

“Well, it isn’t ideal for first contact. Or for learning about their society.” I tapped my chin for a few moments. “Let’s move along the strand and see if we can find something more up-to-date.”



One week later, we admitted failure. We had not only moved millions of miles along the original strand, but we had even jumped to one of the other strands and continued our survey.

“There’s all kinds of variation in detail,” I observed, “including different climate zones and completely uninhabited areas. But everything is pre-industrial. Why would a species build such an amazing feat of engineering, then sentence themselves to essentially live in a zoo?”

“Maybe that was the point of building it. These are aliens, Bob.” Bill shrugged. “Their motivations may not be understandable.”

“I’ve never bought into the idea that aliens will have indecipherable motives. Which makes it odd that you feel differently.” I smiled at Bill to take the sting out of the comment. “Things like curiosity, greed, self-interest, self-preservation, anger, fear, all of these are pretty basic pro-survival tropisms.”

“Sure, but that doesn’t make their behavior predictable from our point of view. For instance, a more herd- or hive-oriented species might not have greed, or not as much anyway. A more predatory species might consider biting you to be a reasonable response to a disagreement.”

“Kzin,” I said, grinning.

“Or Pav,” Bill responded. “Because of their large family structure, they certainly have a different take on life.”

“But it’s comprehensible, isn’t it?” I argued. “We, or humans, might not live that way or want to. But we can understand the motivations of the Pav. Same with Kzinti or Klingons. In this case, we think this might be a semiaquatic species, like beavers or otters. How will that affect their attitudes?”

Bill shrugged without comment. I was pretty sure I was right, but we wouldn’t know until we figured out how to get in.



I grinned at the traditional catcalls and jeers as Bill tried to get control of the moot. I noted, though, several pockets of Bobs that weren’t participating in the ribaldry. This included a half-dozen or so Bobs dressed up as Borg, as well as other groups who mostly still looked like Original Bob. This reticence seemed uncharacteristic for Bobs, although I thought the Borg might be just trying to stay in character.

As I looked around, I realized that there was a certain amount of miscellaneous cosplay going on. Nothing really out there—at least not yet, I admitted to myself. As replicative drift continued, I expected individuals would become bolder.

Bill seemed to have sufficiently dampened the flames of rebellion, and he began to talk. Well, shout. “Okay, people. We have an update on the Snarks. I think you’ll find this all interesting. We’ll also be asking for help from anyone who cares to volunteer. There are some technical hurdles that could use some dogpiling.” He waited for the anatomical suggestions from the audience to peter out, then turned and gestured to me.

I climbed the podium to more shouted suggestions and grinned at the sea of faces. “Those of you who were around for the Others reveal will feel a bit of déjà vu, I think. But in this case, we aren’t at war, so that’s a plus.” I waited for the razzing to subside. “So, first, here’s a native Snark …”

I auto-piloted through the presentation of the megastructure residents while mentally reviewing the upcoming second part of my presentation. As usual, the Bobs were respectful and quiet when interesting information was being presented.

Then came the second part. I started with an overview of the topopolis, during which you could have heard a pin drop. I followed with close-up rotation scans, and ended with blueprints of the megastructure entrance mechanisms.

As I finished, and my voice petered out, there was a moment of silence, an indrawn collective breath, then—pandemonium. Bill laughed out loud as he jumped up onto the podium. Nothing got Bobs excited like interesting new stuff, and nothing felt better than a bunch of excited, enthusiastic Bobs. Even the Borg cosplayers were jumping up and down.

“So, here’s what we need,” I said, when the hubbub had died down. “We need a group to work on plans for getting into the megastructure without revealing ourselves. We need a group to work on android design for Snarks, based on the scans we have, to be improved on once we get close-up scans. We need a group to continue to scan the megastructure, to see if there are variations in either engineering of the structure itself, or the placement or technological level of the inhabitants, or any other variations you might find. It’s a billion freaking miles of structure, so the more the merrier. And as an ongoing project, we’ll want people to help decipher the language and culture.”

And more pandemonium.

I glanced surreptitiously at the group that Bill had identified as Starfleet. To a man, they were silent, with dour expressions on their faces.



“We’re in business,” Bill said. “More volunteers than available positions. The Skippies have agreed to do language analysis, as you’d hoped. The hardware group that was working on giant robot spaceships has already dropped their project in favor of the android design—interestingly, the Borg wanted in, too. I think there’s something about androids that tickles their fancy. And there’s a D&D-obsessed group, calls themselves Gamers, that wants to work on the breaking-in thing.”

“Why?” I asked, frowning.

“Don’t ask me. By about twentieth gen or so, individual motivations stop being predictable, even when they’re still mostly Bobs.”

“So Starfleet didn’t squawk.”

“I don’t think they saw any point. Even if they could have gotten a word in edgewise, they wouldn’t have accomplished anything except getting themselves shouted down. But”—Bill hesitated, frowned, then gazed at me intently—“that doesn’t mean they’re just going to fold. Original Bob wouldn’t have. So we have to keep our guard up.”

At that moment, Garfield popped into my library. “Hey, Bill. Bob.” He signaled Jeeves for a coffee, grabbed Spike, and sat down with the cat in his lap. Spike, as usual, was purring before Garfield even started patting her. I couldn’t help smiling. Original Spike had been like that—the exact opposite of a standoffish, snobby cat. I remembered all the times she would climb me as I sat at my computer, then drape herself across the back of my neck. I’d left that last habit out of the cat’s AI—it had literally been a bit of a pain in the neck.

Garfield was excited about something.

“What?” I said.

“Well, we’ve agreed we will have to be more careful than Jacques was about the drones. The Pav were truly 18th to 19th-century-equivalent. If they’d seen something, they would have just assumed it was a bird. The Snarks may have technological-age knowledge, even if they don’t have the actual tech. For whatever reason.”

“Also,” Bill interjected, “even if the common folk don’t have tech, whoever is still running the topopolis certainly will.”

“You think it’s still being actively staffed?” I asked, frowning.

“Hard to see how it couldn’t be. Imagine people walking out of a nuclear power plant for a couple of days.”

“Or any other similar operation,” Garfield said. “I remember Life After People, thanks.”

Bill shrugged, unwilling to be offended. “Anyway, the topopolis is still apparently running like clockwork, so it’s being maintained and managed. I guess they could have just handed it over to an AI …”

“I can’t see that happening. An intelligent species wouldn’t just hand over responsibility like that,” Garfield retorted.

“You’re anthropomorphizing.”

“You know Original Bob’s view on this. Aliens will still act rationally within the bounds of their environment and biology.”

“Which doesn’t mean they’ll act like humans or make human—”

“Okay, kiddies,” I interjected. “Let’s save this convo for when we know more. Gar, do your D&D guys have a way in?”

“Well, a highly theoretical one. We want to see if we can attach a cloaked drone to a Boojum without it noticing. If so, we can piggyback in.”

“We could be waiting forever—”

“No, some of the surveillance guys found an entrance that’s heavily used.”

“Only one? Across a billion miles of topopolis?”

“No, of course not.” Garfield frowned at me. “There are three on each strand, for a total of nine like this one. But the others appear to be much less busy, and more specialized. I think only the one is being kept at full operating capacity for system patrols.”

“That seems odd,” Bill said.

“Not really,” Gar replied. “All the work’s been done. The system has been cleared. It’s all routine patrols now. I imagine the patrols are scheduled so they do shift changes or whatever when the entrance revolves around to their side.”

Bill shrugged and didn’t argue the point. “Is the traffic flow predictable?”

“Yes. It wasn’t obvious at first. There are irregular arrivals and departures that masked the scheduled stuff, but eventually we extracted the periodic events from the noise. We just wait for one of the scheduled ‘shift changes’ and we should be good.”

“And we’ll have contingency plans?”

Garfield smiled. “Standard practice. Ever since Hal and the Others, a dead-man switch has been de rigueur in the Bobiverse.”

“I don’t want to be too destructive …”

“Thermite in all the right places,” Garfield replied. “Just enough to melt the drone, without continuing down like alien acid-blood.”

“Well, I guess we’re set.” I sat back and tented my fingertips. “Excellent.”





9. Group Building

Bob

August 2333

Virt

I looked around at the crowd in my library, uncertain if I should expand my floor space for the occasion. This was enough people to make my VR hardware sweat a little.

“Okay, everyone,” I said in a loud voice. “Let’s get started. Everyone knows me, Bill, Will, and Garfield. Guys, these are the people who’ve volunteered their time and/or their groups’ time to help out with the expedition planning. I figured we all ought to get together and formalize things.”

I motioned to my left, to a Bob with a floppy conical hat perched on his lap. “This is Gandalf, representing the Gamer group. They have volunteered to come up with a plan for getting some drones into the megastructure, and later to get some androids in.”

“Preferably without setting off alarms,” Gandalf said with a grin.

“That would indeed be preferable. Are you still leaning toward the hitch a ride plan?”

Gandalf nodded. “Nothing better has presented itself.”

I gave him an amused snort in reply, then motioned to the next person, who was wearing a grey nondescript coverall. “This is Hugh, representing the Sk—er, Singularity Project.” I paused, unsure if I’d just committed a social blunder.

“It’s okay, Bob. We know we’re referred to as Skippies. No one’s offended.”

“Er, okay. Hugh represents the Skippies, who are engaged in trying to build a super AI.”

“Wait,” Garfield interrupted, “I thought the Skippies went to numeric designations instead of names.”

“To be more accurate, we’ve moved away from audio speech in favor of packetized communication,” Hugh said. “Think of it like converting to sign language as a primary communications medium. Our ‘names’ are semantically equivalent to IP addresses.”

“Wow …” said Garfield.

“But for day-to-day with other Bobs, I go by Hugh.”

“So you guys aren’t against this expedition?” Bill asked. “I understood the Skippies disapproved of relations with biologicals.”

Hugh shook his head. “Not in the same way as Starfleet, if that’s what you mean. Those guys are wacko. It isn’t a moral thing with us; we just think that interfacing with bios is inherently limiting.”

“Well, sure, we operate on different time scales, but what’s the problem?”

Hugh grimaced. “Look, Bill, guys, we—all the Bobs, that is—are what’s known as a speed superintelligence. We can and do operate at a much higher processing rate than humans. The problem is that we continue to accommodate them. Every time we slow down to interface with them, all the time we spend adapting to their history, time scale, schedules, is wasted time. It also sets psychological constraints on us. If we just let go completely, we could, as a species, experience centuries of internal life for every month of objective time.”

The rest of us exchanged glances. “Uh, it’s not completely wrong,” I said, “but it assumes that we have a goal of some kind with sufficient motivation to mandate cutting off contact with humans. There really isn’t any such schedule or deadline.”

“No, there isn’t. Like I said, we’re not wackos. But the inefficiencies add up. It’s like taking the long way to and from work every day because you don’t feel motivated to figure out the most direct route. You waste a lot of time that could have been put to better use.”

I shrugged. “Okay. I don’t disagree, I just question your priorities.”

“Hold on,” Garfield cut in. “You said it wasn’t a moral thing with you. Does that mean you think it is with Starfleet?”

“Yeah, at least on the surface.” Hugh paused and returned Garfield’s gaze. “Those guys aren’t Bobs anymore. Somewhere back in their ancestry, someone got a double dose of drift in something. Or maybe there’s some PTSD from the last common ancestor’s personal timeline, maybe from the Others war. Whatever the reason, they’ve become obsessive about it—it’s not an intellectual stance. It’s almost VEHEMENT-like.”

“Well, that’s not worrying or anything.”

Hugh grinned at me. “It was inevitable, though, sooner or later. And it isn’t relevant to this project anyway.”

“So why are you helping?”

Now it was Hugh’s turn to shrug. “Honestly, I just think the topopolis is interesting. And we’ve just brought some new neural-net designs online, which we need to stress-test. The information processing requirements on your project will make good test cases. So, win-win.”

“Fair enough.” I cocked my head at Hugh, inviting him to continue or volunteer more commentary. However, he seemed to be done. I gestured to the next person and grimaced. “This is … Locutus.”

“Seriously?” Garfield said in an incredulous tone.

“Hey, I’d have preferred Hugh, but it appears to be taken,” said Locutus.

I eyed him. His getup was generally Borg-like, but there was a lot more armor than I remembered from the TNG episodes. I pointed and said, “Are you sure you’ve got the theme right?”

Locutus flexed, moving the shoulder pads. “Steampunk influence. We’re kind of evolving, you know?”

Gar rolled his eyes. “Aw, jeez.”

“Aaaaaanyway,” I said to the group. “Locutus and co. are part of the design team for the Boojum androids. They’re going to be working on the low-level stuff first—autonomous systems, muscle placement and control, and so forth. Which also means they’ll need some in-close SUDDAR scans of the natives with a lot more detail than we have so far.”

“Action shots would be good, too,” Locutus said. “We want to get the proper walking, running, and swimming mechanics. Imagine putting together a beaver mock-up that bounces around like an otter. Probably wouldn’t fool anyone.”

My chuckle was echoed around the table. “We can probably get video clips from the spy drones for that side of things. Which is good, because we’ve already got a lot of demands on our SUDDAR scanning schedule. Hugh, how are things going with the vibrating windows idea?”

“Not great. There aren’t that many locations where conditions are clean enough for us to be able to pick up usable sounds. The Snarks appear to be garrulous in large groups, but much less so in smaller groups. It’s like they egg each other on. Unfortunately, large groups make it too hard to isolate anything. Plus, it turns out glass isn’t as common as we might have expected.”

“Controlled environment,” Bill said. “They aren’t really outdoors as such. Plus having a coat of fur would make them less concerned about temperature swings.”

Hugh considered for a moment. “Speculative, but not unreasonable. I took a close look at some scans as well. It looks like they use oiled paper for window coverings. Way easier to make, but totally unsuitable for what we were attempting. All of which means we’ll have to depend on spy drones more than expected.”

Locutus held up a hand. “Hey, listen, what would help us a lot is some input from a biologist, especially one with anatomical expertise. I wasn’t sure if I should bring it up, but …”

“Bridget?”

“Uh, it would be handy. I know she’s a little skittish around large groups of Bobs, but …”

I sighed. “I’ll talk to her, Locutus. Anything else?”

Will waved his hand. “I have a line on a guy who was an expert on megastructures. I’ll set up an appointment to talk with him.”

“Was?”

“Well, he’s dead.”

“I …” I gave Will the side eye. “Wait, he’s a replicant?”

“Yep. Retired to the Vulcan Post-Life Arcology in the Omicron2 Eridani system. Apparently he turned right around and started lecturing at the university again, via manny. So I have to fit myself into his schedule.”

“Whatever works.” I looked around the room. “Anything else that needs to be covered?”

There were several shakes of heads, but no responses.

“Great. I’ll call another general meeting if necessary, but for the most part you can all follow your own schedules. Thanks, all.”

Within a few milliseconds, everyone had popped out, leaving only Bill. With the load off the VR system, I reactivated Jeeves and accepted a coffee.

“So what’s up?”

“Bridget.” Bill hesitated. “Locutus was right to ask about her for consulting, but I want to take it one step further. I’d like to see her on the expedition itself.”

I frowned. “She’s got children, Bill. And Howard. I don’t know how well that would work. She’d have to be away from them for large periods of time.”

“Granted. But they might be able to work something out. Or she might clone.”

“Doubtful.”

“Yeah, I guess. But let’s not write off the idea without trying, okay? At least bring it up.”

I nodded. “Will do.”





10. Things Are Coming Together

Herschel

September 2333

Interstellar Space

I sat back in my chair, laced my fingers together, and grinned at Neil. “I do love it when a plan comes together.”

“Plan, my hairy white butt. We floated an idea—”

“And got bites. It would seem a lot of people on Romulus do not like the political climate.”

“Hardly surprising, Hersch. FAITH never completely went away, even if they suffered some, er, PR setbacks. They’re still trying to take over, still trying to drive policy.”

“And still messing things up.”

“Mm-hmm. So, what’s the count?”

“Well, someone started a society …” I paused to reread the email. “Ever Onward, they call it. Very high-sounding. They have something like fifteen thousand members.”

“All willing to climb aboard and start a new colony, somewhere far away?”

“That’s the theory. I’m sure a lot of them are just playing at it, or joining up as a form of protest vote.”

“Are you sure you want to go this way, Hersch?” Neil was frowning, and his tone was more serious than usual. I decided I should pay attention.

“C’mon, Neil, we’ve had lots of conversations about the way things have stalled. You’ve agreed with me—”

“Wait, I’ve agreed with you? When did you become the mastermind?”

“Not important. The point is, we agree the Bobs seem to have turned to various forms of navel-gazing. Gamers, Skippies, even Will with his Valhalla terraforming. They’ve become like old men with their stamp collecting.”

“There are still Bobs heading outward.”

“Phineas, Ferb, Icarus, and Daedalus. They’re running away as much as anything. I tell ya, buddy, something is going on that’s not healthy.”

“So you’ve changed your mind about this?”

“No, I think I maybe want to expand it some. Do more than just ferry another batch of humans to another planet.”

“Like …”

“We’ve got this crap-ton of refined material from the Pav deal, so we don’t have to stop for a long, long time. Set up enough manufacturing internally so we can crank out Heaven vessels assembly line style. Populate them with AMIs, like they did in the Battle for Terra, and squirt them out at every system we pass by.”

“And remote-control them?”

“Yeah, Neil. It’s called delegation.”

“Or laziness. What about the colony?”

“If we’re sending the AMI-controlled vessels ahead of us, we’ll know if a system has a viable candidate planet, and we can stop and set up.”

“Then continue on? Sounds a lot like Ick and Dae.”

“At least we’ll be doing something. I’m tired of being a museum piece.”

“It’s not the most terrible idea you’ve ever had. Let’s talk to the Ever Onward people.”

I nodded to Neil and started composing an email. For the first time in a long, long time, I was beginning to feel excited again.





11. Breaking In

Bob

October 2333

Outskirts, Eta Leporis

No plan ever survives contact with the enemy.

Okay, the Snarks weren’t the enemy as such, but they were the opponent in the scenario we were executing. And the viewer count on our remote feed probably included half the Bobiverse currently in range of BobNet.

“There’s a gaggle of Boojums heading for the entrance,” Bill said.

“Should it be gaggle?” someone asked over the intercom channel. “How about murder?”

“How is that better? Crows or geese. Either way—”

The argument went viral, and soon there was an actual discussion channel dedicated to the question of what unit would be used to describe a gathering of Boojums. Or maybe Booja. The question of plurals had a side discussion of its own going. I shook my head in disbelief and chuckled. Replicative drift or not, Original Bob was still very much alive in this gaggle of post-singularity replicants. Or maybe herd. Or pack.

While the name-obsessed discussion spiraled into ever more esoteric suggestions, Bill announced into the intercom, “Ballistic trajectory set. We should be able to drift right in and settle on a couple of them with minimal vector adjustment.”

“Assuming they don’t pick today to change things up, just for fun.”

“I’m pretty sure those are some equivalent of AMIs,” Bill replied. “They’ve shown no variability at all. Strictly script-driven.”

There was a moment of silence as the cloaked drones approached within a dozen yards of the Boojums. Even the name-obsession discussion petered out.

The drones drifted in the last few yards, made a minute adjustment, and … contact. The non-streamlined design of the Boojums allowed the much smaller drones to settle inside the Boojums’ skeletal frames so that they didn’t stick out. If there was some kind of automated security, it was highly likely that silhouette matching would form part of the strategy.

“Well, we appear to have been successful,” Bill said.

“Any traffic?” Will asked. I turned at the voice—I hadn’t sensed Will’s arrival. Then I remembered I was in the moot VR, and didn’t own the monitoring channel.

“Just radio.” I pointed at the section of the data window that indicated radio traffic. “Packetized, and either compressed or encrypted or both. We’ve tentatively identified envelope and control fields, but we don’t have enough context yet to spoof them. Even assuming we could come up with a legitimate-looking addressing and data payload.”

“But no SCUT?”

“Nada.” I shook my head. “We’ve gotten used to—okay, we had gotten used to everyone on Earth having the same technology, but who knows how much of that was caused by the fact that everyone was sharing knowledge—”

“Or stealing it.”

I smiled and nodded to acknowledge the point. “Sure. VEHEMENT and all that. But the Others had stuff we didn’t, and vice versa.”

“And even with the Brazilians, that was true. They had the cloaking thing.”

I shrugged and let the silence hang for a moment. “Yes, and to my point. The Boojums seem to be following the same pattern—more advanced in some ways, less in others. I guess in isolation, the tech tree development path isn’t an inevitable march.”

“They’re going in,” Garfield said, interrupting our conversation. Sure enough, I’d gotten wrapped up in the discussion with Will and lost track of the main event. Wow, senior moment.

Given that it was a cylinder with a fifty-six-mile radius, from close up the outer shell had the appearance of a flat wall. Directly ahead of the Boojums, a huge space dock stood open. Massive reinforced doors seemed to be there only for emergencies; we’d never seen them move since we began surveillance. The Boojums drifted in, small attitude jets giving occasional puffs as they corrected their individual vectors. Eventually the crafts drifted into docking bays designed specifically for them. An army of small service bots stood ready to receive the arrivals.

After much discussion and argument, we’d settled on winging it as a strategy. Not our finest moment, I felt. The best suggestion had been to bail the moment the Boojums docked, before any detailed examination could start.

We had a good idea of what we could expect from SUDDAR scans, but there was still a large amount of risk. In these close quarters, the drones were visible—as in eyeball-visible—even with the camouflage technology to make them appear to be part of the larger structure of the Boojums. If some kind of maintenance bot decided to take a detailed look, our geese might be cooked.

The space dock was long but didn’t penetrate deeply into the outer shell. It contained a large number of Boojum docking bays, about a third of which appeared to be occupied. Other vessels of uncertain function filled differently configured bays.

And in the middle of it all, small bots zipped along on unknown errands, mounted on some kind of track system attached to all available surfaces. The overall effect was of a kind of organized chaos.

There were indications that this area was originally configured to support Snarks as well. We could see sealed, windowed areas that were probably control centers for some kind of operational staff. And a couple of the unidentified vessel types appeared to have hatches and viewports. Scans, however, had not shown one single trace of life. This whole operation was running on automatic.

The nonrotating outer shell was a hundred yards thick, consisting mostly of some kind of friable material. It wasn’t structural; it was intended to absorb meteor impacts and block radiation. But it had many embedded design details, like a rigid support frame and the docking bay for the Boojums. And the item we were most interested in: the vector-matching system for getting from the nonrotating outer shell to the swiftly rotating inner shell without being ground up like seeds in a pepper mill. Getting access to what we were calling the Spin Transfer system was our ultimate goal.

It must have been an interesting engineering challenge for the builders. And the solution, based on our SUDDAR scans, was genius. An elevator shaft ran through the outer shell from the cargo bay to the inner surface. Maybe elevator wasn’t the right word, since with no rotation, there was no artificial gravity to worry about. But it was as good a label as any.

Embedded in the inner surface of the outer shell was a magnetic rail system circling the gap between the inner and outer shell, with components attached to each shell. A container would run along the transport rail from the cargo bay, then transfer to the vector-matching system, and accelerate to match velocity with the rotating inner shell. At that point the container would be “handed off” from the outer shell to the inner, after which it would dock at one of four stations spaced equidistantly around the circumference of the inner shell.

Well, that was the theory. We hadn’t seen a single container actually make the trip on any of the entrance assemblies that we’d been surveilling. As near as we could tell, the containers were all docked at the base of the transport rail. The Boojums didn’t need to go inside, and apparently nothing inside needed to come out.

The Boojums settled onto their assigned racks, and maintenance bots moved forward to perform oil changes or whatever they did. Our drones detached from the Boojums, staying as close as possible to avoid becoming free-floating silhouettes, and floated slowly along the length of the vessel. They had orders to transfer to a wall before they got to the nose area, just in case sensors were still active. We thought the Boojums were probably in maintenance mode at this point, but best not to tempt fate. In the end, we were depending on the complete lack of curiosity and total single-minded focus on the task at hand that typified every AMI in existence. As far as we knew.

The Gamers in charge of flying the drones were frame-jacked high enough to be able to take the time to consider their actions and the possible consequences. But that also meant I’d have to jack if I wanted to communicate with them. Constant disassembly and reassembly of my VR would be too disconcerting; I decided to just remain a spectator. We could compare notes later.

Soon the drones were positioned in a small alcove created by the intersection of an airlock area and two support columns. SUDDAR scans had indicated that this would be out of line-of-sight for most of the bay. There were a number of cameras and sensors in evidence, but without tracing the circuitry there was no way to know which ones might be surveillance of some kind and which ones were strictly operational. We had already decided not to worry about it. There was no way to make this op completely safe, so we would learn from our failures and try again, if necessary.

The drones waited for a break in activity, then scooted to the next rally point, a dead area between two different types of docking racks. They whipped around the last corner into the alcove, and almost ran right smack into a maintenance bot.

“What the hell?” Bill exclaimed.

I jacked immediately, VR be damned. “Anyone have any idea what that thing is doing here?” I said to the drone operators in general. At this clock speed, they were represented only by their metadata tags, hanging in a virtual void.

One of the tags, labelled Randall, replied, “No, and it wasn’t on the planning scans. There’s nothing here. It’s just a gap in the—oh.” A window popped up and spun around for all to see. “Looks like a bulkhead repair in progress.”

“Friggin’ hell,” I muttered. “It’s times like this that I’m glad I don’t have an actual heart to have a heart attack with.”

I returned to regular Bob-time, reassembled my VR, and turned to Bill, who was just moving his lips to begin whatever next sentence he had in mind. I cut in before he could get properly going. “It’s doing bulkhead repairs. Complete coincidence. And we’re above its sensor area, so it probably hasn’t noticed us.”

“Peachy,” Bill replied. “No alarms so far, anyway. We might just pull this off.”

It took several more hops by the drones, but there were no more coronary-inducing events. The drones found themselves in front of an access panel. According to our scans, this would lead to what some wit had called a Jeffries Tube. In theory, it should get us to the acceleration track used by the mechanism that connected the nonrotating outer shell to the rotating inner shell of the megastructure. But from that point on, there would be more “winging it” involved, as not all the engineering control systems could be resolved in detail.

One of the drones released some roamers, which popped out customized screwdrivers and attacked the attachment points on the panel. I had a moment of, I don’t know, déjà vu? Nostalgia? Something like that, as I noted that the Snarks used a screw head virtually identical to a Robertson. I guess some geometry problems are universal.

The roamers couldn’t reseal the hatch properly from the inside, so once all our units had entered, the roamers pulled the hatch closed and performed a small spot-weld. It wouldn’t hold against any kind of assault, but the point was for things to appear normal, not for us to fortify our rear. Job complete, the roamers climbed back into the drone and we continued on.

We couldn’t wait around to catch a ride on the rail system, since there seemed to be no rides to catch. We certainly couldn’t activate the system on our own—and even if we could figure out how to do that, it would probably attract unwelcome attention. That seemed like the kind of system that would require some high-level management involvement, if only for approvals and scheduling.

That left us with the strategy of scurrying around the innards like rodents, trying to make our way to the inside of the megastructure. Which was easier than you’d think. Rodents had been finding pathways through everything humans had built for millennia.

One advantage of the containers all being parked was that the ring was empty, like an elevator shaft with no elevator. And the drones had sufficient acceleration to be able to match up with the inner shell while following a circular path. So we would be able to dock on the inner shell receiving station.

It took several hours of preparation, mapping out small spaces and dodging maintenance bots, but we eventually found ourselves ready for the big step—flying from the stationary outer shell to the rotating inner shell. We decided to try out the strategy with one single drone before risking the entire squadron. There was some initial wobbling until Gandalf got the hang of it, then the drone’s path smoothed out.

The drone landed on a small maintenance platform in what I suppose I’d call the station or terminal on the inner shell that was supposed to give the inhabitants of the topopolis access to the elevator system. I could see where the elevator containers would mate up with a pressure door, allowing passengers to go from a pressurized elevator cabin to a pressurized megastructure interior.

Up to this point, we’d been operating in vacuum. Now we’d have to figure out how to get into a shirtsleeve environment—again, without setting off any alarms.

Once the entire squadron arrived, the next step was intelligence gathering. A couple of drones ejected roamers, which swarmed over the hatch system. In about ten minutes, we had a report.

“Well, the good news is that the systems are well-designed,” Gandalf said. “That means they have manual overrides in case something goes wrong.”

“And the bad news?” I asked.

“The manual overrides have what I expect are alarm sensors, so as soon as we use them, management will know.”

“So …”

“We’ll gimmick the sensors. If the ‘door opened’ sensor doesn’t trip, no one will be the wiser.”

“That could take a while.”

“Yep. And some of those sensors are on the other side of bulkheads, so we have to drill through to get to them. We’ll send in the two-millimeter roamers.”

“And this won’t set off any alarms?”

Gandalf shook his head. “This isn’t a top secret military base. They wouldn’t expect anyone to be trying to break in like this, so why would they engineer for it?”

That seemed like dubious logic. Or wishful thinking. “Confidence level?”

“We scanned it, Bob. There’s just the one level of sensor security.”

I nodded, satisfied for the moment. But if alarms went off, heads would be slapped.

“Think about the scale, Bob,” Bill added, sidling up to me. “A billion miles of megastructure with doors, airlocks, passageways, restricted areas … How would you police that? You have to set up automated processes, and trust those processes to bump alerts upstream. You want to avoid redundant signals as well, to keep the overall processing down.”

“So kill the alerts at source, and nothing happens.”

“Yup,” Gandalf said, looking up from his monitor.



I’ll give the Gamers their due, they were careful and methodical. It took almost half a day to defang the airlock to the point where it could be used without bringing Armageddon down on us. Finally, Gandalf gave the thumbs-up, and we began manually cycling our devices through.

At one point I had a thought and snorted. “It would be a helluva thing if you got this far only to discover that the drones couldn’t fit through the airlock.”

“It would indeed,” Gandalf replied with a smirk. “Which is why we checked for that during the planning stages. That is why you pay us the big bucks.”

“Assuming I paid you any bucks.”

“A valid point.” He grinned at me, then turned back to his monitor. “And this is the last load. Next stop, megastructure interior.”

Once past the airlock, our drones found themselves in a corridor leading from the Spin Transfer system into presumably the main part of the station. I spent some time examining the corridor. There wasn’t much to see—low-level lighting illuminated the area, and I could see what appeared to be traditional elevator doors at the other end. Unless you were shaped like a Krell, there were only so many ways to design corridors and doors, so it wouldn’t have looked out of place in a human-based installation. Even the writing. Apparently, the need to label every damned thing was another universal. Although I couldn’t read any of it, I amused myself for a few moments by imagining Snark exhortations to not injure one’s limbs by sticking them in the crushy-grindy place, and other legally mandated warnings for idiots.

The elevators were reminiscent of any random office building on Earth. There was also, because the Snarks had some version of building codes, a set of emergency stairs. The stairs might or might not be alarmed, and the elevators might or might not alert someone when used. I hoped the Gamers had taken those possibilities into account.

“Elevators aren’t alarmed?”

“Don’t know,” Gandalf replied. “Same problem as with the inter-shell rail system; we can’t tell where the signals go. But the stairs don’t have door sensors.”

I grunted but otherwise didn’t respond. It wasn’t me climbing the stairs after all.

This part of the operation turned out to be fairly tedious, like trekking through a dungeon that was all corridor. Of course, something could always jump out of a hidden alcove, which made for a strange combination of stress and boredom.

We passed doors to several other levels on the way up, but finally all the drones were at the top of the stairs. As Gandalf described it, the door opened into the foyer of the transit station on the inside surface of the megastructure. In better times, this was where the inhabitants would have come to travel to the outer shell and then outside the topopolis. There was some indication in the scans that this was also a transit stop for some kind of internal transit system. Unfortunately there were only so many milliseconds in a day, and that investigation had been back-burnered.

“So here’s where it gets complicated,” Gandalf said.

“And what have we been doing up till now?” I asked.

“Two problems.” Gandalf brought up some subsidiary windows to illustrate. “First, the foyer has cameras. Second, there are sensors on the external doors. Third, if management wanted to keep the natives out of the station, this is where the security would be concentrated, both inside and outside. So we can’t use the front door.”

“I assume you have an alternative.”

He grinned at me. “Big bucks, remember? We’re going to tunnel out.”

“Tunnel? Like The Great Escape?”

“Well, it’s not like we haven’t been cutting into things right and left. And the Snarks use that weird ceramic carbon-fiber material everywhere that we’d use concrete on Earth. Which works out for us, since it yields to a plasma cutter with very little argument.”

“So after all this high-tech spy stuff, we’re going to dig our way out like rats.”

“Ya gotta know when to go low-tech, Bob.”

Garfield pulled up a schematic of the station and pointed to a spot. “Here. This will come out just under ground level, so we can cover it up once we’re through.”

“Outside surveillance?”

“That’s not a problem. There are cameras covering the entrance, but not so much the back and sides.”

“Then let’s do this.”



Cutting through the wall, then digging up to ground level was tedious but mostly uneventful. We surprised a representative of the local wildlife when the roamer popped out of the ground. The animal, some kind of deer-analogue, I think, jumped straight back about ten feet, then bounded away with a panicked bleating.

“Time to start spying,” Gandalf said. He sent a command to the drones and several of them popped open their cargo doors. Out came little spy drones, a combination of tech from my spying on the Deltans and Jacques’s spying on the Pav. Improvements in technology, including but not limited to the Casimir power sources, meant that the modern version of the spy drone was no bigger than a sparrow. Add in the camouflage system, and we were confident we’d avoid discovery by the natives. These drones would, among other tasks, try to supplement the Skippies’ scans with some good old-fashioned eavesdropping.

Discovery by the mysterious topopolis controller was another thing to consider. It was a safe bet that the habitat included surveillance of some kind, if only to watch for maintenance issues. Add to that the fact that the natives were actively kept to a largely pre-industrial level, which could necessitate some kind of surveillance system anyway. How the technology limits would be enforced was an important question. We didn’t want to accidentally get caught in a purge of some kind.

“Spy drones are on their way,” Garfield commented. “Now, we wait.”





12. Expedition Prep

Bob

November 2333

Outskirts, Eta Leporis

The spy drones had multiple duties, so they’d be busy for a while. In addition to finding a way to eavesdrop on the Snarks and learn their language, the drones would be doing biological surveys and surveys of the towns and infrastructure. The drones had been given a search algorithm by the Skippies, which according to them would help to gather the required raw data in a more efficient manner. I didn’t necessarily distrust them, but I’d nevertheless rigged a hardware monitor into the drones. It would be completely undetectable unless you knew the access protocols and keys. Bill’s paranoia seemed to have colored my experiences with the Bobiverse in general.

There was plenty to do, meanwhile. We had enough basic info to start on fabbing an alpha version of the Snark mannies. Details could be filled in once the Skippies finished their biological survey. And there was still the question of getting Bridget involved, at least for consulting on the Snark biology.

I was working on the manny design when I got a ping from Bridget. She and I didn’t hang around together, so this was unlikely to be just out of the blue. I suspected someone might have said something to someone. I sent an accept, and a moment later she popped in.

Bridget spent a few mils looking around at my library. “I very much approve. Howard had a library motif for a while, but never this many books. Are they real?”

“All of them, right down to content,” I said. “I’ve raided every human database I can find. BobNet contains the sum of human and Pav written knowledge.”

“Well, it’s great to have a hobby.” Bridget hesitated, then launched right into what she was really here for. “Bob, I’d like a position on the Snark exploration op when it’s ready.”

“Okay.”

“I mean, I’m a biologist, and I have lots of exp—wait, what?”

I grinned at her. “Honestly, I was trying to figure out how to bring it up. I was planning to take the coward’s way out and talk to Howard.”

“I am simultaneously offended and gratified,” she replied. “Still, results are what count. I see you’re working on mannies. How much work to do a female version?”

“Ah, Snark sexual dimorphism is minimal. Females have a slightly larger head, but it’s probably mostly about pheromones. So, not much.”

“Good. Bill tells me you have the Skippies doing the survey. You trust them?”

I raised an eyebrow at that comment. My earlier conversation with Bill about the subject was an intra-Bob kind of thing. To have a third party concerned about the Bob variants put a whole new level of significance on the problem.

“Why in particular do you ask, Bridget?”

“Oh, they haven’t started chanting ‘One of us, one of us,’ or something equally nefarious. It’s just that they really aren’t Bobs anymore. It would be less unsettling if they changed their appearance like the Borg cosplayers, but they still look like Howard, or a pod-person version of him.”

“You’ve watched Invasion of the Body Snatchers?”

“Bob, I’m married to Howard. What do you suppose we watch on movie nights? Wuthering Heights?”

I laughed and she smiled in return, and I was reminded once again what Howard saw in her. Among many other things.

I shook off the moment with some effort and changed the subject. “The Skippies originally figured a couple of weeks at most to get a complete picture of the local Snark culture. Which we’re almost at the end of. We all acknowledge that there may be regional differences with over a billion miles of potential spread. But we’ll deal with that, if and when.”

“Accents or even different languages, cultural drift, nationalism … I get it. Depends how long they’ve been cooped up in there, too.”

“Not long, I—”

Bill popped in at that moment. “Bridget, hey! Has Bob managed to convince you to come on the expedition?”

Bridget gave me a smile and an eye roll, then replied to Bill, “Yes, he has. Took a lot of work …”

“Horse puckey.”

Bridget laughed, then turned back to me. “You were saying?”

“Oh, based on our survey of the Snarks’ home planet, residual radioactivity, and number of forest fire tracks, we figure it became unlivable somewhere around a few hundred years ago. I’m not sure what that means in Snark generations.”

Bridget nodded and glanced at Bill. It occurred to me that Bill was here for something, so I tilted my head at him in a silent invitation to speak.

“Right,” Bill said. “I came here for something. The Skippies delivered a preliminary report. Mostly ecosystems and general survey—they’re still having a slow go of it on the language and cultural stuff. Although they did give me a couple of things. The natives call themselves Quinlans. At least that’s the closest phonetic rendition. And the topopolis is called Heaven’s River.”

“Cool. Okay then, the Snarks are now officially Quinlans.”

“Have they compiled a detailed report on biology?” Bridget asked.

“Hugh gave me some general notes and said he’ll have a formal report for us within forty-eight hours.”

“Hugh?” Bridget asked. “I thought the Skippies all use numeric designations.”

“I guess there’s still some Bob there, because they’re pretty easygoing about it. They’ll use nicknames when dealing with the rest of us.” I turned to Bill. “Have you talked to Will yet?”

“Yep. He’s okay with the plan. So, me, you, Garfield, and Bridget, with Will as backup.”

“Good. I’ll ping everyone when I get the final report, and we’ll meet here and discuss it.”



Will was the last to show up. Bridget raised her coffee cup in salute as he popped in. That was a habit she’d picked up from me—well, from Howard. I had it on good authority, though, that her coffee was espresso-level-plus and would dissolve any spoon unlucky enough to be dunked therein.

Will parked himself in a beanbag chair that I’d materialized for him, accepted a Coke from Jeeves, and motioned to me with one hand.

“So, here it is,” I said, waving a sheaf of paper. The report wasn’t actually on paper, but it made a good metaphor in virt. “Megastructure layout, ecology, Quinlan culture, language (both written and verbal), customs and taboos, and very little history.”

“What? Why?”

“Hugh reluctantly admitted the Skippy group that worked on this wasn’t sure—he looked like the admission gave him constipation—but the Quinlans just don’t seem to talk about it much, and what they do talk about seems to be heavily mythologized. The library they checked out had nothing in the way of objective historical records. So we’re still in the dark about that. One more good reason for the expedition.”

Bridget looked up from her copy of the report, which she was perusing on a tablet metaphor. “The Quinlans appear to be a species that evolved on the banks of rivers. Like river otters or beavers—”

“Both of which they resemble,” I interjected.

“Yes. With a little bit of platypus thrown in,” Bridget said with a smile. “But all their habitations are close to water, either the main rivers, tributaries, feeder rivers, or small lakes. All freshwater, too. I’m not sure how the megastructure maintains that. There must be filtering going on.”

“There are impellers of some kind set periodically along the bottom of the river,” Bill said. “That’s an efficient way to keep current flowing along a billion-mile-long river that’s actually level the whole way. They might also perform a filtering function, as well as turning over the water.”

“We have some information on local flora and fauna, farming and animal husbandry, and so on,” Bridget said. “Sociological stuff is almost nonexistent.”

“I think the Skippies might have skimped on that aspect a little.” I grinned. “Not very interesting.”

“So it’ll be a learning experience. That’s fine.” Bridget sat back and tossed her tablet on a side table. It bounced as if made of Nerf. “Now, about the androids …”

“Ah, yes, I think you’ll be pleased.” I vanished the report and popped up a schematic in the center of the group, then gestured to Bill to take the floor.

“Android tech has been improving steadily, thanks to its popularity. And a lot of feedback from you and Howard.” Bill nodded to Bridget. “I think your current mannies back on Quilt might be a couple of generations behind the bleeding edge, though.” A Quinlan form materialized beside the generic android schematic. “The latest mannies no longer contain any metal at all. Circuitry, even the SCUT interface, is all quantum-bionics and metamaterials. We’ve gone to great lengths to make the density of the internals similar to bio physique, so mannies are no longer ludicrously heavy for their size. And we’ve introduced a circulatory system that contains fluid indistinguishable from blood. It acts as lubricant, coolant, and transport for repair nanites. We even have digestive systems that will convert food into, uh, quite believable waste products.”

“Just can’t resist the potty jokes, can you?” Will grinned at him.

“You bet, number two.”

Garfield, Will, and I laughed while Bridget rolled her eyes and shook her head. Still not very mature, nope.

“Now, we’re maybe up to the beta version of a Quinlan manny,” Bill continued. “Translator interface is still in development, and a lot of the reflexes are probably not realistic. Bridget, we’ll need your help to refine that. Space is tight, because we are trying to build as much self-repair capability as possible into the units. If something goes wrong in-country, you won’t be able to just take it into the shop for repairs.”

Bridget nodded, her gaze glued to the schematic and supporting windows. “How is it with heat dissipation?”

“Ah, yeah. Not great, with the fur and the short, dumpy profile. A human manny can run full speed all day. A Quinlan manny will have to stop and cool down. Although in water they will probably be okay.”

“Well, we are entering new territory, aren’t we?” Bridget replied with a smile. “I think I’ll talk to Marcus, though. He’s probably the expert on non-humanoid mannies these days.”



“Bob, I have a concern,” Bridget said to me a few moments later. The others had already popped out and it seemed she’d been waiting to talk to me alone.

“Okay?”

“This expedition is looking like it could be a long-term thing …”

“Well, yeah, it’s pretty much open-ended. We’re not just doing research—we’re also looking for Bender, or at least some indication of what happened to him.”

“We have to stay with our mannies full-time, except when sleeping, right?”

“Yes, but you can pop out during the sleep cycle, or even just frame-jack for a moment to take care of something. I went years on Eden and never had a problem.”

“But you don’t have children. My kids are human. I have to deal with them in real time, and on a human schedule. Plus there was that movie, with the tall blue aliens …”

“Avatar?”

“That’s it. Remember the main character left his avatar sleeping, and it almost got run over before he could get back to it?”

“Oh, yeah. Kind of a downside, I guess.”

Bridget dropped her gaze, silent for a mil, then sighed. “I guess I have three choices. I can drop out, and I’d never forgive myself. I can simply bite the bullet and go into this full-time, and do short visits with Howard and the kids when the opportunity presents. Or I can …” She took on a pained expression. “Replicate.”

“Whoa. A Bridget clone? You’d be the first non-Bob to do so.”

The pained expression grew cloudier. “Well, I’m not particularly concerned about firsts. Not in that way, anyway. The thing is …” She hesitated again.

“Other Bobs?”

“Yes, especially the later ones. It feels sometimes that there’s this expectation that I should replicate and be everyone’s girlfriend. It doesn’t work that way.”

“I know, Bridge. And I’m sure the other replicants do as well, at least on an intellectual level. But they see you with Howard, and you know, the train of thought is hard to resist.”

“But Howard is not just another Bob. He’s unique, and our experiences together are unique.”

“Yeah, I know, but Original Bob, for all his intelligence, was not all that emotionally self-aware. And the model hasn’t improved over time.” I cringed inwardly, thinking of some of the things I’d learned the hard way about myself, back on Eden.

“I get it. And I haven’t actually been approached or anything. But if I do replicate myself for this expedition, it might be like the floodgates opening in terms of expectation.”

“Understood. I’ll help out any way I can, as will Bill and Garfield. But it’s your decision. We’ll accept whatever you decide, and we could probably get Will to take your place with minimal convincing. Although he might have an objection to a female manny, if you wait until we’ve already built the units.”

“Well, there’s a rumor—”

“Still unverified.” I grinned at her. “And they’d have to be really late-generation. Original Bob had no uncertainties about his gender.”

She laughed. “It would be pretty cool, though, to have another woman in here.” Then she turned somber. “I’ll think about it and let you know, Bob. Sorry for the headache.”



I had never been to a moot quite this raucous. Officially, the subject under discussion was the Heaven’s River expedition comma planning for. In reality, Starfleet had come to the moot loaded for bear. They consistently torpedoed any attempt at discussion with points of order and derails of various kinds. Bill showed a lot more patience than I thought a Bob was capable of. I was sure I’d have lost it by now.

They were actually wearing something that was close to but not quite TNG command uniforms. I guess they wanted to make the point without being out-and-out laughable. A lot of Bobs seemed to think they’d failed on that last bit, judging from the derisive comments.

At the moment, a red-uniformed “officer” was spouting off. “You don’t know if they purposely decided on this life. That’s the point. You’re going in, you claim, to ‘see if’ they’re captives, but you’ll do the damage before you know if it’s necessary. Assuming it’s necessary.”

Starfleet paused to take a breath—totally unnecessary in the Bobiverse, but a habit ingrained through thirty-one years as a human—and Bill took the opportunity to jump in. “And you’re assuming prima facie that we’ll be doing damage. Of course you are, because you consider interacting with them to be damage. Then you point to the interaction as proof of the damage. Circular argument. No Kewpie doll. Sorry.”

“We have a responsibility—”

“Argument by assertion.”

“… to keep from interfering in the affairs—”

“Prejudicial language, and you haven’t proven the assertion yet.”

Starfleet gave Bill a murderous glare, and another red-suited member took up the attack. “Look at your history. Deltans, Others, even humanity. Every time you interact, you cause damage—”

“Others? You’re using the Others as an example?” Bill’s expression of bristling disbelief was probably at least partly acting, but if there was ever a justification, this was it. “The Others weren’t just sitting around minding their own business, you know. The damage they were doing—”

“There’s always a rationalization, isn’t there?”

I stopped listening. Sadly, it was like most political arguments. No one was willing to debate their base assumptions, or justify them, or compromise on them. The simple tactic being that if you repeated your assertion often enough, with enough emotion and volume, the opponents would somehow be forced to see things your way. Never worked, of course, at least it never had with Original Bob, but that didn’t stop people from trying. Even Bobs, apparently.

I scanned the audience idly while waiting for Starfleet to get tired of beating their collective head against a brick wall, and was surprised to see two unfamiliar faces. I tried to check metadata, but I was blocked, so I sent a low priority text to Bill. He responded during Starfleet’s next tirade, evidently not listening any more than I was.

Couple of replicants, clients of Eternity Solutions. From Asgard.

That was interesting. The people who chose a replicant afterlife were buying into strata-title virtual reality systems—computer systems orbiting in the Oort in their local system—rather than setting themselves up with a spaceship. From what I understood, you could purchase different packages, which got you access to different levels of computer power, different VR options, and even access to mannies for physical interfacing in real. They had access to BobNet as well, as did anyone, but mostly they’d kept to themselves.

We had security policies set up, of course. They were guests in the computer sense of the word as well as the social sense. But Bill had an open-door policy regarding the moots. If anyone wanted to visit, or even play some baseball, that was fine.

The woman appeared bored; the man was trying to look in every direction at once, totally overwhelmed by the experience. It was obvious who had brought whom to the moot.

They weren’t making any waves with the Bobs, either. Not like when Bridget or Henry first joined the moot. It must have become at least somewhat commonplace.

I brought my attention back to the argument when the currently speaking Starfleet rep abruptly made a cutting-off gesture and said, “Enough. This is pointless. I can see you’re not going to do the right thing on your own. So be it.” He nodded to his group, and as one, they winked out. The moot erupted into pandemonium. More than before, I mean.

“That,” I said to Bill in a low voice, “was a veiled threat.”

“Yeah, but what, exactly?” He frowned. “Well, maybe we can get this meeting done, now. And you and I will have to discuss this later.”



Hugh was sending updates every twenty-four hours. For all that made the Skippies weird on paper, they were a lot more civilized and courteous than Starfleet, whom you’d think would be almost mainstream in the Bobiverse.

Language and customs were coming along, finally. We seemed to have crossed some kind of cusp, where blocks of disparate information began coalescing into a more complete picture. We could actually go in with what we had at this point, in an emergency. We’d just pretend to be from far away. And in Heaven’s River, far away really meant something.

The Borg had finished their android design based on the complete report on biology and had given me an autofactory blueprint for one generic native Quinlan, male or female, with editable parameters suitable for producing distinct individualized units. According to the notes, Quinlans differentiated each other primarily by facial shape and features, just like humans, plus some color variations in facial fur. The complete package included software and hardware support for generating unique faces. The notes also stressed that some field testing would be required before the design could be considered ready.

It was funny. For all the divergence of the Bobs, give them a problem to solve and the differences disappeared. I would be very sad when I met a clone that lacked that quality. That would no longer be Robert Johansson in any sense that mattered.

The exploration crew, including Will, was due for a meeting at 16:00 to go over our status. So I was a little surprised to get a ping from Bridget five minutes early. I invited her over and she popped in right away.

“Hi, Bridget.” I gestured to her favorite chair, and she dropped into it, looking uncharacteristically unsure of herself.

“That thing we were talking about earlier?” she said, and waited for me to nod. “I’m not going to clone.”

I waited for Bridget to continue, but it looked like she was waiting for me to comment. “Okay. You’ve discussed it with Howard?”

She nodded. “He’s not happy, mostly because I’m not happy. I mean, he’s happy I won’t be cloning, but …”

“I know what you mean. I have to be honest, Bridge, I don’t entirely understand why you and Henry are so much against replication. I mean, I’ve never been what you’d call a fan, but we are heading for ten thousand Bobs by now.”

“Many of whom don’t self-identify as Bob clones anymore.” Bridget waved off my incipient reply. “I know, that’s not relevant to your decision, but it is relevant to ours. Plus, your being a humanist helps—you don’t see yourself as being any more or less Bob than Original Bob or any of your clones. For someone with, um, a more metaphysical view of life, it’s not that simple. The best I can describe it is that I feel like each of us—myself and my clone—would end up with half a soul.”

I opened my mouth to point out that technically, by her belief system, only Original Bridget had the soul, but realized in time that that would be the exact opposite of reassuring. Maybe I was finally learning when to keep my cakehole shut.

“And on a more personal basis,” she continued, “the new Bridget would be cut off from Howard and from our children. I know I wouldn’t be able to ‘share’ them with her, and Howard told me flat out that he’d be completely weirded out by the idea. I try to imagine myself waking up and realizing that I’m the copy, that I’ll never again be with Howard and the kids—” Her lips quivered as she struggled to regain control. I waited quietly, giving her as much time as she needed.

Finally, she said, “I couldn’t do that to myself. Or to other me. So I’m going to accept that I’ll be working away from home for a while, and I’ll make it up to them when I’m done.”

“Okay, Bridget. Either way, it’s good to have you on the team.”

She flashed what Howard referred to as one of her nuclear smiles, and I felt my IQ drop. Fortunately, Bill and Garfield picked that moment to pop in.

“Hey, all. Got the latest from Hugh.” Bill waved a bound report at us as he threw himself into his chair. Garfield settled in with a little more dignity. I summoned Jeeves, who brought in coffee, little sandwiches without crusts, and a perpetually full and fizzy glass of Coke for Will when he showed up.

Bill held up one of the sandwiches. “You’ve served these a couple of times now. I like them, but where did the idea come from?”

I grabbed a sandwich and scrutinized it. “Dunno. Random memory from Original Bob, I guess. I’ll probably get tired of them eventually, but you can put a lot of different things in sandwiches.”

Will popped in, waved, and flopped into his beanbag. “Okay, lady and germs. Let’s do this.”

Bill grinned at him and tossed the report into the air. It morphed into a video window, and Bill waggled a finger to pull up summaries and sub-windows. “Androids are coming along. It’ll be a good six months yet before they’re ready, assuming they pass all functional tests. We’re working with a lot of new techniques here, so I don’t want to rush anything.”

Bill motioned to Garfield, who took up the thread. “The Gamers went through a ton of scenarios, but couldn’t come up with anything tricky that would get four Quinlan-sized bodies through the airlock and past the Boojums. So they’ve suggested we just bore through the outer shell, then work our way into the elevator system internally.”

“That seems risky. What if the Boojums notice?”

“Well, the Gamers suggested that the Boojums can’t be too hair-trigger about the outer shell. After all, even with the amount of in-system cleanup they’ve done, there will still be a certain number of micrometeor impacts every year. If they came running each time there was a tremor, they’d be doing nothing else.”

“Good point.” I cocked my head. “Are we going to test it?”

“I figure we’ll just pick a point between two airlocks and start digging. If they come running, we either run away or self-destruct, then come up with another plan.”

Will grinned. “Well, it does have the virtue of simplicity.”

“Yeah.” I rubbed my eyes. “All right, let’s give it a try. Gar, can you be in charge of implementation?”

“Sure thing.”

“Next order of business,” I said. “What do we do when we get in?”

“Damned if I know,” Bill answered. “We have absolutely no indication that Bender is even in Heaven’s River, let alone where he might be. This makes a needle in a haystack look like a sure thing.”

“Except we don’t really need to find Bender,” Garfield interjected. Heads turned to him. “All we need to do is establish contact with whoever has him. Or failing that, with whoever runs the ship. Assuming they’re not the same group. This isn’t a blind search, it’s more like detective work.”

“True enough. We’ll be working blind initially.” I was silent for a moment as I went through the options. “As we learn more, we can narrow things down a little, maybe get more of a sense of direction. Metaphorically speaking.”

There were nods around the circle as each person worked through the implications. This was the open-ended aspect of the project. We had no idea how long it might take to narrow things down, because we had very little idea what we were going to find.

“It’s worth noting,” Garfield said into the silence, “that there aren’t that many Boojum airlocks. If you assume that Bender’s matrix went in through one of them, it really narrows things down.”

“True. There are, what, nine entrances?”

“Yes, and most of them appear to be inactive, which makes sense if they aren’t doing anything beyond cleanup patrols.”

“Could we send in multiple teams?” Bridget asked.

Bill shook his head. “We talked about that. More teams would mean more delay, and more likelihood of exposure. Once the topopolis controllers discover our existence, they’d likely institute some kind of large-scale search, and maybe take other defensive postures. Remember, we don’t know that they’ll be friendly. Our only contact with them so far has been them blowing up Bender, and then Bob’s drones. I don’t want to take a chance on how they might react to an invading force. Keep it small, don’t look dangerous.” He grinned at us. “Having said that, if we run into a brick wall, there’s always the option of sending more teams in. Bob can build some more matrixes locally and do some cloning, if bandwidth starts to become an issue. But the mannies take a lot of time to build. Very finicky design.”

“The spy drones will continue to spread out, as well,” Will added. “In both directions, upstream and downstream. If they find anything unusual, we’ll be alerted, and we can make a beeline for that location.”

We all exchanged looks. “I guess we’re on track,” I said. “Let’s see how the tunneling works out, then we’ll meet and discuss.”





13. Swimming with the Fish

Howard

December 2333

Big Top, Epsilon Eridani / Poseidon, Eta Cassiopeiae

“Another beautiful day in Tantor.” Hands behind my back, I gazed through the picture window at the layers of cloud outside the city dome. At our altitude in the atmosphere of the Jovian planet Big Top, I could see at least fifty miles of clouds above us, and anywhere up to a hundred downward, before the view faded into the mist.

“They renamed it Trantor after all your carping, Howard. You got your way. Stop being a sore winner.” I could feel Bridget’s glare boring holes in the back of my head. She was right, of course, but what was the point of being a curmudgeon if you couldn’t curmudge?

I turned and walked over behind her. I kissed the back of her head, and she leaned into me. This gave me an opportunity to examine the image on the Canvas. “More new Quilt species?”

Bridget pointed to several items. “Sure looks like it. I can’t figure out the mechanism, but Quilt biota can and often do spawn new species every few generations. I shelved this for five years, and I’m basically starting over from scratch.” She swiped the Canvas with an irritated motion and the screen winked out of existence.

“If you go on this expedition with Bob, it could be another several years. You might never catch up.” It wasn’t quite an objection, but it wasn’t supportive, either. I still hadn’t decided if I was for or against Bridget going.

“I know, Howard, but Quilt will still be there. This is a once-only opportunity. Did you contact Marcus?”

“Yep. He’s agreed to give us a tour. He’ll be waiting at Moody Port. We should pop over in virt first to say hi.”

“Then let’s do this.”

The manny closet opened at my mental command, and we stepped into our individual pods. As the pods started to close, I took a quick glance at Bridget. Her resting face showed she was more concerned than she let on. I knew this decision would be hard. I also knew she’d agree to do it. There were few people as driven as my wife.

I exited the manny and popped over to Marcus’s VR. A moment later, Bridget appeared. Marcus, sitting by a fireplace, waved to a couch. Coffee and snacks sat on a coffee table within easy reach. Marcus was using the standard Bob library VR at the moment. Probably taking a rest from the Battlestar themes.

He waited until we were comfortable and properly snacked, then said, “So I understand your inquiry has to do with the business that Bob-1 is involved with, but I haven’t really been following it. Mind filling me in?”

“We’ll be going into the megastructure wearing mannies that mimic the native sophonts.” Bridget shifted and leaned forward, gesturing with her hands. “That part isn’t new. Bob-1 did it with the Deltans, and Howard and I have done it. We’ve even done non-humanoid mannies, as with the Big Top native species.”

Bridget glanced sideways at me and I grinned. Flying around in the gas giant’s atmosphere as humongous manta rays was one of our first adventures as a replicant couple, and we still did it occasionally for fun.

Bridget continued, “The natives are generally humanoid, but they’re also aquatic. And they’re intelligent, and come from a technological society, although we’re not sure of their current level of knowledge. From that point of view, it’s a bit of an unknown. We were hoping you could give us some perspective on aquatic mannies.”

Marcus nodded and looked thoughtful for a fraction of a mil. “The Poseidon dolphins are intelligent animals, but as far as we can tell, they’re animals. Just like Terran dolphins were. There’s a simple language, but it’s at the level of danger, predator, and good food. There’s no symbology or grammatical structure. It’s only slightly more advanced than baboon calls. So I’m not sure where I come in.”

“You’ve been living among them almost full-time for a couple of years, though,” Bridget replied. “How well are you accepted? How long did it take to fit in? And how hard is it to ‘act like a dolphin’?”

“I get the impression they think I’m a little weird.” Marcus shrugged and gave an embarrassed smile. “But I’m not shunned. I’ve had to fend off some mating advances, so I’m not too weird, ya know?”

“Hasn’t stopped me,” I interjected. Bridget made a low growling sound as Marcus laughed.

“I think it sounds like you’re concerned about fitting in without issue. That just requires doing your homework first. As for the aquatic end of things …” Marcus shrugged. “Well, let’s find out. I have a couple of spare dolphin mannies.”

Marcus messaged us a couple of addresses, then popped out. I followed immediately, and found myself lying on my stomach on a platform, in a dark room. Wait, no, it wasn’t a dark room, it was underwater. I rolled my eyes upward as I examined my action inventory, and saw that we were about ten feet below the surface, on the edge of what was probably one of the Poseidon plant mats. This would be Moody Port, formerly a major colony location on the West Indies mat. Nowadays, with everyone living in flying cities, it was strictly for agriculture and aquaculture.

To my left, two other dolphin mannies were moving around. A quick ping identified Bridget furthest left and Marcus to her right.

My heads-up help system indicated that the dolphins used a swim bladder to control buoyancy. I flexed and felt myself float up off the platform. A quick flick of the tail and I was sliding forward through the water.

Original Bob had never been much of a swimmer, preferring to keep water in bathtubs and, in extreme situations, hot tubs. But this was different—more like flying. The big difference seemed to be the complete lack of any concern about drowning. Of course, in a manny, breathing wasn’t a problem anyway, but the Poseidon dolphins actually were fish, so they absorbed oxygen from the water using something like gills. Interestingly, they could also absorb oxygen from the air while floating at the surface, by pumping air slowly through their swim bladder. So holding one’s breath would never be an issue. It was kind of a best-of-both-worlds thing. The resemblance to Earth dolphins was remarkable, though. The domed heads and beaked mouths could fool you into thinking you were dealing with Earth stock, until you spotted the vertical tail flukes.

Bridget shot past me, then glided to a gradual stop. She turned, and repeated her actions. Marcus bumped me, then spoke over the universal intercom. “She’s very methodical. Testing maneuvers one at a time.”

“You have no idea.”

“Hey,” Bridget said, “I’m swimmin’ here.”

“There’s a pod that hangs around this area because of the spillover from some of the aquaculture. I figure we’ll go join them for a while, and you can see what it’s like to swim with the natives.” Marcus swam off, clearly knowing where he was going. I glanced at Bridget, and we turned to follow.

Over the next few minutes, Marcus gradually increased his pace. I had a brief bit of trouble at one point, sort of like when you change from a jog to a sprint, and I couldn’t get the new rhythm. But by letting go and allowing the autonomous systems to take over, I was able to correct. After that, I kept up with Marcus with no effort.

“We’re going just about flat out for a dolphin,” he said. “We’ll have to slow down before we get to the pod or they’ll think we’re running from something. We don’t want to start a mobbing.”

“That’s not part of the autonomous systems, though, right?” Bridget asked.

“Correct. There are some things you just have to learn through study,” Marcus replied. “How’s your swimming?”

“Fine, thanks. I feel a lot less concerned about that aspect of things. The manny systems seem to be highly competent at mimicking natural reflexes.”

Marcus didn’t reply, but he did an exuberant barrel roll. I did a barrel roll of my own, then found I’d overshot and had to complete a second one. Some things apparently did require practice.

Marcus slowed down and began taking a more circular path. Probably we were getting close to the pod, and he didn’t want to charge straight at them. Even at a lower speed, I could see that being a challenge.

Within a minute, we slid up to a pod of the native version of dolphins. Fifteen individuals, including three juveniles, slowly swam through the water, nabbing small swimmers and scraps of plants or animals. They didn’t appear to be very choosy. Presumably most things were edible in this world-ocean.

On the other hand, I used to own a dog that regularly ate dog poo, so who knew?

The adults in the pod turned and began circling us, more in a curious than aggressive manner, fortunately. They were making noises, and my translator rendered them as: “What?” “Who?” “Friends?” “Marcus friend.” That last one was interesting. Apparently their proto-language included tags for individuals, which the translator converted to Marcus’s name.

Marcus said, “Friends. Marcus friend.” That appeared to be enough. The pod did one more circuit, then went back to feeding. One of the juveniles came over, briefly bumped Bridget, then went back to its, uh, his mother.

“That was cute,” I said.

“Not so sure,” Marcus replied. “That one is approaching puberty. He might’ve been checking out your wife.”

“That’s it. He’s sushi.”

Bridget laughed, did a quick barrel roll, then porpoised into the air. She came down with a splash. That seemed to trigger the entire group, and soon everyone was leaping and splashing.

The game lasted about ten minutes, after which we all floated on the surface for a short time, pumping air through our bladders. Then it was back to feeding.

“Not a bad life,” I said. “Might get a little boring after a while.”

“The big predators mostly avoid the mats, Howard. We’ve made our feelings clear enough about their attempts to raid our farms, and they’ve gotten the message. If you want excitement, swim about a mile farther away from the mat. Krakens don’t know the difference between a real dolphin and a manny, and I can tell you from experience that getting eaten is not fun.”

“I’ll give that a pass, thanks. There’s a limit to what I’ll do for research.”

“I understand you have some kind of a training program going on?” Bridget said, changing the subject.

“More of a selective breeding thing. Dolphins that have more facility with communications and comprehension get a fish treat. Better-fed dolphins have more and healthier offspring. See where I’m going?”

“You’re breeding them for intelligence.”

Marcus did another barrel roll. “Uplifting. By non-invasive means.”

I found myself simultaneously fascinated and a little shocked. “Have you discussed this?”

“Some. By and large, people don’t see a problem. The dolphins aren’t a threat or competition, and on balance I think it would benefit them. And let’s face it, Howard, Poseidon citizenry doesn’t have any tolerance for a central authority, given our history.”

“No kidding.” Marcus had been one of the key figures in the overthrow of the previous totalitarian government. What they had now was more like independent city-states. It seemed very ancient Greece, but it worked.

“Guys? The pod is acting funny.”

Marcus and I turned at Bridget’s comment. The dolphins had become completely quiet, and in fact were barely moving their tails enough to stay in place. They also appeared to all be looking down.

I rolled enough to be able to point an eye downward. Sliding slowly through the water below us was a leviathan. I remembered from my reading that they grew to about the size of a Boeing 747. This one seemed much bigger, but that might have just been me freaking out. “Didn’t you say they stayed away from the mats?”

“On average,” Marcus replied. “This one seems to have developed some bad habits. I’ll message Perimeter Security. Meanwhile, let’s just emulate the dolphins and not attract its attention.”

“There’s a plan.”

Vaguely cuttlefish-shaped, the leviathan had four tentacles that it used to grab prey from below or above the water. They’d taken out a significant number of humans in the first year on Poseidon, before the colonists figured out how to keep them away.

Perhaps this one was just passing through. It didn’t vary its heading or speed and was soon lost in the watery distance. The dolphins started to swim around once again, although they remained more subdued than previously.

“That was fun,” Bridget said.



After another hour, Bridget announced she was satisfied. We squeaked goodbye to the pod and headed back to Moody Port. Docking the mannies took only moments, and then we were back in Marcus’s VR.

“Did you get what you needed?” he asked.

“Yes, I think so,” Bridget replied. “I’ve noted some things that are important to allow for in our research, but generally speaking, I don’t think the physical aspects of being aquatic are going to be an issue. If we can adapt to being dolphins, we can adapt to being oversized beavers.”

“Are you going to be working with the dolphins over the long term?” I said.

Marcus nodded. “I’ve kind of picked a vocation, I think. I’ve noticed that Bobs in general seem to eventually gravitate toward some kind of endeavor and then stick with it. Like the group trying to design and breed an intelligent airborne species on Newholme.”

“Wow, I hadn’t heard of that one.” I grinned and shook my head. “Well, as long as someone doesn’t get the idea of raising the elder gods or something.”

“That would play hell with your humanism, wouldn’t it?” Bridget stood. “Time to go. Thanks for your help, Marcus. Let’s go, Lovecraft.”





14. Council of War

Bob

April 2334

Virt

It was an even fuller house today. I had the leaders of the support team, as well as the expeditionary members. Bill, Will, Garfield, Bridget, Gandalf, Hugh, and Locutus all sat, according to individual preference, in La-Z-Boys, beanbag chairs, or wingbacks. I’d given in and expanded the library floor space. It was a bit jarring to see everything just that little bit farther away.

“Things are going well, relatively,” I said. “No major hiccups at this point.”

“Uh …” Locutus held up a hand.

I sighed. “Something happened since I talked to you this morning? Manny construction in trouble?”

“No, nothing that dramatic. Just something that occurred to me. We need to field-test the mannies, but there’s no actual field where you are. If you get my drift.”

“Oh, for God’s sake,” Garfield muttered.

I grinned at him. “Isn’t it always the little things that bite you?” I scanned the group. “So, okay, the Steam-Borg have the mannies ready, but we have no way to test them in a realistic environment. In the past, we’ve always had a planet for testing. And if something went wrong, we could just do a fix and re-release. In this case, once the androids are in-country, we’re stuck with them.”

“We could use the Quinlan home planet,” Garfield suggested.

“Absolutely not,” Bridget replied. “We don’t know everything that went into the destruction of the home world. Can we call it Quin?” We all nodded and she continued. “The Quinlans had some kind of conflict or multiple conflicts that ended up killing off everything on the planet. Nukes and orbital bombardment are obvious because they leave evidence, but what if they used biological warfare as well? Imagine us picking something up on the mannies and then transporting it to Heaven’s River. By definition, it’d be virulent and hard to kill.”

“Um. Good point.” Garfield sat back, embarrassed.

“Still, we can’t afford to not test the mannies,” Bill said. “Look, it’s not quite as good, but we can at least test the design. We send one or two mannies down to Quin, and just leave them there when we’re done. It’ll set our schedule back, having to fab a couple of replacements, but it’ll be much faster with the second batch. And if we find an issue, we can fix all of them.”

Locutus sat forward, showing enthusiasm. “We can send some maintenance equipment down with them, including a small printer, so we can perform any fixes on the planetside mannies as well. That way we’re always testing the current version.”

We all looked at each other, smiling. It was an excellent solution. And, as a bonus, it might settle some questions about Quinlan history.

“Good.” I turned my attention to Gandalf. “Now, how about gaining entry?”

Gandalf blew out his cheeks. “Uh, good news and bad news.”

“Great,” Garfield grumbled.

“The good news is we have a plan. The bad news is it will carry some risks, not only of getting caught, but also of getting ground to a pulp.”

“Even more great.” Garfield sat back and crossed his arms, looking aggrieved.

“We can’t activate the Spin Transfer system. That’s the bottom line. There’s no way to do that without alerting the powers that be. It’s just too tightly bound to internal control systems.”

“That’s not terribly surprising,” Bill said. “Do you have an alternative?”

“Yeah, but you’re not going to like it.”

“I already don’t like it.”

Gandalf flashed a quick smile. “The collection bins in our mining drones are just big enough to fit one Quinlan manny at a time—”

“No. No way!” Garfield interrupted. “You cannot be serious.”

“Sorry, but yes. We’ll ferry the mannies in the same way we ferried the spy drones in, except one at a time, like I said. Look at the bright side, you won’t all be at risk at the same time. It decreases the chances of losing the entire expedition—”

“While increasing the chances of losing one member,” Garfield interrupted. “I don’t like it.”

“No one does, Garfield, but we haven’t come up with anything that isn’t even riskier in one way or another. I assume that getting discovered by the topopolis administration is a nonstarter?” Nods around the coffee table confirmed the statement. “Then by definition, risk of equipment loss is less critical. So we examined a number of alternatives, and this is the least risky.”

“What is the risk of damaging the topopolis itself if we screw up?” I asked.

“Negligible,” Bill replied before Gandalf could. “You have to think of the relative masses. If you’re jogging and you run into a mosquito, how much damage do you take?”

“I hate mosquitos.”

“As do we all, even out to twentieth generation,” Bill replied. “I doubt that’ll ever change, as mosquitos have no redeeming features. But to my point, the drone and manny would get slapped onto the inner surface of the outer shell hard enough to leave a crater and not much else. That inner shell, though, is tough. It has to be.”

“You’ve tested it?”

“We originally reconstructed the material from scans. There’s some truly ingenious layering involved. It’s about fifty percent stronger, pound for pound, than our hull material. And that stuff is wicked strong.” Bill nodded emphatically to reinforce his statement.

“Huh. Okay.” I thought for a moment. “Can we bring in a spare manny?”

“Expedition needs to be four,” Bridget said. “That’s the most typical number for young Quinlans going on a sabbatical.”

“Yeah, I’m not clear on that part,” Will said. “Sabbatical?”

“It’s not the right English word, but it’s the closest we can come. Young Quinlans, just around adulthood, often leave their home city, usually in a group of four called a sabbat, to see the world and possibly find a new place to settle. They might start a new town, or they might just join an existing one. My guess is that the behavior evolved to keep the gene pool diverse. It’s generally mostly males that do this, although females are common enough that no one would be surprised if one of the group is female.”

“So no one will be curious about a female alone with three males?”

Bridget smirked at Garfield. “Quinlan females are slightly larger than males and have the same teeth and claws, so unwelcome advances would not work out well. Anyway their mating is seasonal, so it isn’t even a question most of the time.”

“Got it. But what about having a fifth manny ready, just in case we trash one of the four?”

“Okay, Bob.” Bridget shrugged. “As Howard always says, you can’t be too paranoid.”

“Fine. Now, Hugh. Language and culture?”

“We’ve made progress, but no real revelations. Our level of language comprehension is good enough to not be suspicious. There’s regional variability, and we haven’t catalogued a lot of the colloquialisms sufficiently yet, but thanks to the sabbatical thing, it will probably even out. So you’ll probably always be able to understand the locals. There are some things we haven’t been able to get a handle on. Maybe you’ll find out more on your travels.”

Gandalf was waving his hand.

“You had more?” I asked.

“Yes. We won’t go in through the cargo bay. We’re going to dig a tunnel.”

“Yeah, it’s been discussed. And it seems reasonable, given that mannies are bigger than spy drones. Why do you bring it up?”

“Well, we’ll have to start now.”

“Ah. So you’ll need miners and roamers immediately.”

“Yup.”

I shook my head. “The TODO. It burns.”





15. Functional Testing

Bob

May 2334

Quin

The cargo drone settled carefully onto the very dead lawn. Or lawn-like flora, anyway. Whatever the plant once was, it had been used by the Quinlans as a lawn-equivalent. I glanced sideways at Bridget’s manny, an action made easy by the Quinlan form’s very mobile and independently movable eyes. The resulting double-image was hard for human minds to handle, but I was figuring out how to pay attention to one eye and ignore the other. It was something the Quinlans did easily and routinely, so it would probably be noticeable if the people in our group never did it. Like a human who never moved his eyes but only swiveled his head.

Bridget turned and smiled at me as the cargo bay doors started to open. Actually, she performed a beak-rubbing motion, which was the Quinlan equivalent. As had been standard procedure since my days on Eden, the manny operating system converted human expressions into native equivalents so that we never had to worry about the actual action. Language was handled in a similar manner, so we spoke and heard English, including colloquialisms. The O/S also chose English name equivalents for local proper names, and kept track of which substitutions were used.

The cargo doors finished opening, and we stepped out onto the surface of Quin. Bridget did a slow and probably unnecessary three-sixty, carefully examining the environment. “No obvious damage in this area. Any deaths here would have had to be from less obvious methods—radiation possibly, or biological. I don’t know if there will be anything to dissect.” She glanced at the drone hovering by her shoulder. Part scout, part beast of burden, part courier, it currently held her medical tools in its small hold.

The city, for city it was, had been built on the shore of a large, slow-flowing river. Instead of a maze of streets, the metropolis was crisscrossed by canals. The infrastructure had been set up so that the river flow turned over the contents of the canals, but with a mild current. That also meant that a design based on right angles would be suboptimal. The actual shape was more like slightly rounded diamonds, with the long axis along the direction of flow. Even if nothing else had been different, it would have made for a more elegant, less utilitarian design than the typical Earth city.

But in addition, the Quinlans seemed to enjoy embellishment for its own sake. Buildings were rarely just simple solid rectangles. We saw cantilevered terraces, elevated walkways between buildings, and even buildings with deliberately engineered gaps through their middles, like the dragon gates in some Hong Kong skyscrapers. Although I doubted feng shui was involved.

And the windows. Quinlans used both placement of windows and color tints to make the side of every building a piece of art. Like giant stained glass murals.

“These people loved their art,” I said in a hushed voice.

“That they did.”

We walked past one building, and I couldn’t help but chuckle. The facade around the entrance had been sculpted into what might be some kind of fairy-tale scene. Unless they actually had a species of giant rodent with a mouth that big … I wasn’t sure if I’d want to bring my children to see this montage. But then I reminded myself that people used to read Grimm’s fairy tales to children.

We walked along a path that ran beside a canal. We could see half-submerged boats and barges in several places. It was likely that the Quinlans used rivers like humans used roads. I wondered idly what rush hour must have been like. Would they use transit? Or would it even be a concept if you could swim like an otter?

The buildings we passed were multistory, but not the high-rise monsters that many Earth cities contained. I didn’t see anything over about six stories or so. Perhaps the Quinlans didn’t like heights. Or maybe they just didn’t see the point.

The most notable feature, though, was the amount of square footage set aside for green space. Every building had a terrace in front of it, and most canals had a treed path running along one side or the other. All brown and dead now. But it would have been beautiful before … just before.

We finally turned and headed back to the building on whose front lawn we’d landed. We had picked it deliberately, after an aerial survey, as the most likely place to find governmental stuff. It had a certain look of officialdom that seemed to transcend species barriers. A combination of pompous self-importance combined with lack of artistic touch or any kind of individuality, perhaps. Or I might be overthinking it.

Getting into the building wouldn’t have been a problem in any case for android muscles or roamer plasma cutters, but fortunately the front doors weren’t locked. We gazed around the large lobby and spotted a directory.

“Hmm, definitely governmental,” I said, perusing the listing, while the heads-up popped up translations. Licenses, statistics, taxes, all the usual things that seemed to infest civilizations everywhere.

“I’m most interested in finding corpses. Emergency Management sounds like something that would be staffed right up until the end. Fourth floor.”

Bridget pointed to a solid looking door near the elevators. We checked the door, and sure enough, it was locked.

“If this is a set of stairs,” I said, “as it appears to be—oof!” The door bent and sprung off its hinges as we gave a concerted push in unison—android muscles, remember—to reveal stairs going up and down. “Yep. And locked at ground level, just as they would be on Earth. So we can assume a similar level of distrust in Quinlan society.”

We proceeded up three flights of stairs, the rise and run looking odd to me but feeling perfectly natural when I went down on all fours. Like the Pav, Quinlans seemed to prefer to be on their hind legs but would go quadrupedal when travelling any distance. I couldn’t shake the image of a fat river otter when watching the videos of them getting around.

We reached the fourth floor and walked down the hall, examining doors and information plaques. The manny O/S didn’t automatically translate written information, but our in-vision heads-up display showed a pop-up translation when desired.

We soon found the offices of Emergency Management. The door wasn’t locked. Presumably there had been traffic in and out right up until the end.

There was no working lighting, of course, but Quinlan eyes had a large effective range to allow for both above and below water operation. Our android eyes were even better and covered a larger portion of the visible and surrounding light spectrum.

“There,” Bridget breathed, and made her way between the desks. A single dried husk of a corpse sat at a desk, head still cradled in its arms, as if the victim had simply fallen asleep at their desk and never woken up. I hoped it had been that peaceful.

Bridget gestured to the drone, which had kept up with us all this time. It floated down to desk level and the cargo door popped open. Bridget reached in and began removing items. “You going to watch?”

“I, uh, I have to do this other thing, over there,” I said inanely, and retreated with my dignity in tatters. I’d seen my share of violence and death on Eden, but somehow the clinical, measured experience of an autopsy added a whole new level of yuck. The manny wouldn’t throw up, but I still experienced the mental reaction of any human non–medical professional.

I heard Bridget begin to mutter to herself, no doubt dictating notes. As it happened, I could make myself useful in the meantime. I examined the office, trying for an anthropologist’s viewpoint.

The desks were desk-like. How many ways are there to present a horizontal working surface? The chairs were more like backless bucket seats with a slot to accommodate the Quinlan butt and tail. Each desk sported something that had to be a phone system, including a handset. Physical buttons were absent—there was a black plate that had probably been a touch screen.

I started randomly opening drawers. Papers, writing implements, and desk accessories dominated. A couple of drawers contained what might be fossilized snacks. I turned off my olfactory sense, even though after all this time there was unlikely to be any residual odor.

It struck me that the interior of this building was surprisingly dry. I’d watched the TV series Life After People when I was still alive, and the show made the point again and again that things would fall apart quickly once people were gone. But everything here seemed to be in pretty good condition. Was that better construction? Or milder weather? Or perhaps a complete absence of bugs, molds, fungi, and so on? I couldn’t use Mario’s survey of the first Others’ victim species he’d discovered for comparison, because the Others had taken the time to knock most structures down and procure the rebar and other metal components.

I tapped on one of the windows. It wasn’t glass. Possibly transparent aluminum or something similar. But that would be one reason for the lack of deterioration. Popped and shattered glass windows were one of the first ways in for rampant nature.

I carried on with my wanderings as Bridget’s voice continued to record her findings. It brought back my ongoing argument with Bill about how aliens would think and behave. Granted, an energy being or silicon entity would have a different outlook on life, but a land animal with the concept of individuality could only do things so many different ways. Desks were flat surfaces for working. Phones were devices for communicating with others at a distance. Doors separated spaces; lights lit spaces. People, or whatever, needed a place to eat and a place to eliminate waste.

I snickered. Maybe a race based on horses would have a different take on that last item. Or cows. I glanced down, looking for cow pies or the equivalent. Nope.

“Bob? Done!” came Bridget’s call. I hurried back to where I’d left her, to find her packing up her equipment. On the desk was—I looked away quickly. Best not. I made a mental note to only peruse the text of her final report.

She saw my reaction and gave me a quick smile, as quickly gone. “There weren’t any surprises in the autopsy. Our deep SUDDAR scans really did catch pretty much everything important about the Heaven’s River inhabitants. I found the remains of a large viral load in the tissues, though. I’ve taken detailed scans and forwarded them to the Skippies. They tell me they can run a simulation if we get enough cellular and DNA detail. It’ll tell us what we have.”

“How long?”

“Day or two, they say.”

“Great. Meanwhile, we’ve found a good place to park the cargo drone when no one is running these androids. Unless you have some more spots you want to check out?”

Bridget shook her head. “Nah, most of our surveys can be visual and SUDDAR. The Skippies are running drones in a search pattern of their own design. They intend to eventually map the entire planet’s infrastructure in detail and put up a virtual globe.”

“Huh. They think big.”

“But it’s all intellectual exercises. They are deliberately avoiding anything that involves contact with biologicals. Or even, to a lesser extent, Bobs. I had a talk with Hugh while we were agreeing on details for analyzing the results of this outing. He’s a nice guy—not a jerk in any way—but kind of, I don’t know, disinterested or distracted. As if we’re keeping him from his video games but he’s too polite to point it out.”

I nodded and sighed. “Yeah, Bridge, you’re not the first person to say that. We are living in an increasingly non-Bob universe.”

A text came in from Bill. You’ll want to test the mannies in water as well.

Ah. Fair enough. The envelope indicated it had gone to Bridget as well. She made a vague out there gesture. “Shall we take a dip in the canal?”



We looked down at the water. Given what I’d seen of the rest of the city, I was sure it would have been kept clean before. Now it had an oily surface sheen and far too much flotsam, although no actual trash. Still, it would do for testing, and it wasn’t like we could actually catch something. I grinned at Bridget, called, “Last one in …” and dove into the water.

I heard a splash behind me. There was a flicker as nictitating membranes covered my eyes, adjusting for the different refractive index. My vision was surprisingly good, considering the state of the water.

And the freedom! The manny O/S took care of the movement and reflexes, and I found myself swimming like an otter, curling and undulating through the water. A shape shot past me and slapped me on the head. I realized that Bridget had just laid down a challenge.

I accelerated after her, and she did a right-angle turn, heading straight down. She whipped around a submerged boat and pulled an abrupt reverse, speeding by me in the opposite direction.

Nice try, but no cigar. I just barely caught her tail with my front paw, but it was enough for tag. She turned and took up the chase.

We surfaced several times for air, even though the mannies didn’t really need it. The androids were designed to mimic the real thing, and that included an internal calculator to track when we should be running out of oxygen. We could ignore it, but in Quinlan company that would likely attract unwelcome attention.

Finally, Bridget shot out of the water and landed on her feet several yards from the edge of the canal, in a perfect penguin exit. I followed, staggering slightly as I landed.

“Bob doesn’t quite stick the landing,” she exclaimed. “The judges deduct half a point!”

“Half a point? I was robbed!” I responded, laughing.

We both sat down at the same time, curling ourselves on the dead non-grass.

“That was awesome,” Bridget said. “It’s almost like flying. Better, in some ways. And I know flying!”

“True. You’ve done enough of it. I think you hold the record for most species emulated, don’t you?”

She smiled at me. “I think Howard might actually have me by a couple. I’ll have to check. But anyway, this will be my first aquatic effort. Serious long-term one, I mean. The test with the dolphins on Poseidon was a, uh …”

She glared at me, knowing what was coming, and I said, deadpan, “Dry run.”

“I so hate that I see those coming now.” She started to lick her fur, then stopped with a jerk. “Oh, God. That’s gross.”

“Part of the Quinlan persona, Bridget,” I said, resisting the urge to groom myself as well. “Maybe we’ll turn that off for now and just let the maintenance roamers clean us off.”

“Works for me.” She glanced up as the cargo drone descended from the sky. It settled to the ground and we climbed in.

I placed myself on the rack beside her. “Okay, then. Let’s park this baby and go home.”



Bill flipped through the video window. “Looks pretty good. Couple of glitchy items, but those are all software. I’d say the androids are good to go.” He tapped the window. “Only one other concern, and that’s how the androids will handle vacuum. The new circulatory system might be subject to boiling under low pressure. Or worse, rupture.”

“No prob,” Bridget said. “Simple to test. Take one upstairs and open the cargo door. Contamination isn’t an issue in that scenario.”

“Good enough.” Bill turned to Garfield. “Can you take care of that?”

“Yessss, master.”

Bill snorted. “We can call in some Skippy help, if you prefer. Or your Gamer buddies.”

“Nah, it’s okay. Gives me a chance to use the android anyway.”

“On that subject,” Bridget interjected. “Will, if you want to practice using the androids on Quin, there’s lots of planet to explore, and I’m sure lots to learn yet.”

Will visibly brightened. “Hey, great idea. I can do that!”

“And go for a swim. It’s unbelievable!” I added.

“Are we good on the sociology front?” Bridget asked.

“The Skippies say they’ve extracted as much as they can from the current dataset. They’re spreading out as the spy drones move farther afield, but diminishing returns is probably rearing its ugly head. There’s not much more to learn from simple observation.” Bill closed the window. “The Gamers have the entrance tunnel all dug, and they’ve widened the hatch from the foyer to accommodate the mannies. There’s no indication that we’ve been detected so far.”

“Think about it,” Will said. “A billion miles of megastructure. How many cameras would you have to be monitoring to cover everything? And they’ve got mechanical sensors on equipment to detect most issues, so why bother? As long as we don’t break something, or turn something on, we’re golden.”

“Don’t break something.” I smiled. “An excellent motto for any age.”

“Do we have anything else outstanding, besides Garfield’s vacuum test?”

“Not really, Will. As soon as that’s done, we’re ready to start building the production models. Anyone want to make a speech?”

“We hate speeches,” said Garfield.

“Well, okay, then.”





16. Human Replicant Reserve

Will

May 2334

Virt, Vulcan Post-Life Arcology

I was outside the virtual door of one Professor Steven Gilligan, a former department chair at the University of Landing on Vulcan with a list of letters after his name that could choke a horse. Professor Gilligan had been an expert in many things when he was alive, but of most importance to myself and Bob was that he specialized in artificial environments.

Of even more interest to me personally was the fact that he continued to lecture at the university, although as a guest lecturer these days. And he did so in a manny custom-made for him. So it wasn’t just us Bobs anymore.

I’d done some research at Bob’s request, and the professor’s name came up a lot. I had finally received an invitation to visit, at the Vulcan Post-Life Arcology. The Arcology was physically located in a large space station orbiting Omicron2 Eridani just inside the Oort cloud. It currently had a membership of about two hundred, mostly rich and famous people who hadn’t felt like waiting for medicine to catch up with them.

I found myself unexpectedly unsettled. I’d been living in real, in a manny, for so long that virt had become a foreign experience. At the same time, I’d been away from human society for so long that I was noticeably behind the times. I resolved to give the situation a good think when I had some time.

The door opened and Professor Gilligan beamed at me. He was short, balding, and slight of build—which surprised me, since in virt he could look like anything he wanted.

“Ah, Mr. Riker. Or is it Johansson? Come in, please.”

I replied with a small laugh. “I run into that a lot, professor. As the only Bob to take a last name as my moniker, I kind of broke the conventions. These days I answer to either, or just Will.”

“And you can call me Steven. Please, have a seat.” He waved to his living room area, which featured a large picture window in which floated the image of a ring-shaped habitat. As with most personal VRs, the setting was comfortable and spacious, but not ostentatious. Fancy layouts and gilding lost their impact when they were free but for the wave of a hand.

I motioned to the view as I sat. “Ringworld?”

“That is a Bishop Ring, actually. This image is intended to be two thousand miles in diameter and a hundred miles across. More than six hundred thousand square miles of prime real estate.”

“Still theoretical, though.”

Steven replied with a shrug. “Of course. Technically it’s just an engineering problem, but the real roadblocks have always been economic and political. When you’re settling a new system, you have to choose to either sit in your ship for however many decades it takes to build the megastructure, or choose to populate the habitable planet essentially immediately. The latter option always wins.”

“And it’s not really just an engineering problem, is it?” I said.

“It is in that we have all the technology required to build one. Just not the knowledge. For instance, no one has ever been able to keep a closed ecology going for more than a year, at least on research scales.”

“And having your ecosystem collapse on a megastructure would be”—I grinned at him—“suboptimal.”

Steven laughed. “Keeping an ecosystem going would not be a trivial task. You can’t have actual bedrock, or a water table, or even very deep soil, at least not without major engineering challenges. So you’d have to pump water up to stream heads, and you’d have to be constantly transporting topsoil uphill to replace whatever gets washed downstream. Trees would have to be shallow-rooted. Burrowing and cave-dwelling animals would be at a disadvantage. It’s essentially like a zoo enclosure—designed to look natural, but carefully engineered nonetheless.”

“What if it’s big enough to have weather?” I asked. “Wouldn’t that work as well, at least for the water supply issue?”

He nodded slowly. “Yes, although that scenario would increase the runoff issue. As I said, Will, it’s all theoretical. With study and experimentation, we could come up with compromises that would provide the best balance of weight savings and ecological robustness. That’s what I mean by not having the actual knowledge.”

I took a moment to admire the Bishop Ring. “Still, it would open up virtually every stellar system with a reasonably well-behaved star. No one at all has expressed any interest in building one?”

“Not to my knowledge, Will. It’s been somewhat a slap in the face for me,” he replied with a chuckle. “As I said, the problem is all the political and economic commitments that would have to be made. Humans have very rarely been able to come together to build anything on this scale, at least since the days of the pyramids.”

I shifted in my seat. “Which brings me to the reason for my visit. You’ve drawn up plans for any number of megastructures over the years, both as serious proposals and as study material for your courses. Have you ever done a topopolis?”

“Yes, certainly. As a megastructure, it has a lot going for it. Effectively infinite land area by simply adding more length; no increase in structural or material strength requirements no matter how long you make it; no need for inhabitants to ever go outside; and if built with sufficient diameter, no Coriolis force to speak of. And it can be added to at any time, if the initial design is done properly.”

“Really? You’d cut open the loop? How would you keep the air from escaping?”

“First, Will, you don’t need to have a closed loop. There’s really no physical reason why you couldn’t leave the ends unconnected. It wouldn’t have a stable orbit anyway, so in either scenario you’d need some method of orbital adjustment. And you’d build it in segments of some length, with some kind of barrier at the end of each segment. The barrier wouldn’t even have to go right to the center, as long as the segments were already rotating. Spillover would be trivial.”

I nodded slowly. Without knowing anything about Heaven’s River, Steven had described it with amazing accuracy. “Good. Steven, I wonder if I could ask you to look at some scans and comment?”

His eyebrows went up; I hadn’t given a lot of detail about the purpose of the meeting, except to say that I wanted to talk about megastructures. He accepted the files as I offered them and converted them to paper idioms, then started flipping through the stack. He muttered a few sentences, then his eyes grew rounder and wider and he went silent. Several times he flipped back to earlier pages. Finally he converted the idiom to a 3D image. Hanging between us was a four-segment-long stretch of Heaven’s River.

“Oh my God. Someone built one? Who?”

“They aren’t human, Steven. We’re still learning about them. Here.” I flipped up an image of a Quinlan, hanging in space beside the engineering segment.

“Have you talked to them?”

“Not openly, no. They have a disturbing tendency to shoot first. We’re trying to figure things out without exposing ourselves.”

“Not the Others all over again, though?”

“No, nothing like that. Just ground-level belligerence, I think.”

He nodded and leaned forward to inspect the segment. “So what would you like to know?”

“Limitations. What they can and can’t do. How they’re likely to lay it out. Infrastructure. We’re looking for someone in the structure, and any info that could narrow things down would be helpful.”

Steven glanced at me, then poked at the image. “Well, I see a transportation system right there. Vacuum monorail or something similar. That would be your long-distance travel option. I love the river concept. Artificial current, of course, since there’s no downhill along the length. I suppose you could raise one end of the river in each segment and pump the water upward, but then you have issues of topography. Even a one-tenth percent grade for this implementation would mean a half-mile elevation at the headwaters. And moving all that mass up and down would create issues of angular momentum.” He paused, then pointed. “The hollow mountains every five hundred miles or so would be where your maintenance and infrastructure would be—”

“Wait, hollow mountains?” I peered more closely at the image. It wasn’t obvious from the visual, but it appeared the interior of the mountains was actually void space.

“Of course, Will. You wouldn’t want mountains of real rock. The mass would place a lot of strain on that segment of the topopolis, and to no purpose. Instead you build a hollow shell which, being closer to the axis, exhibits less centrifugal weight than average. Then you put all your infrastructure that you don’t want people to have to look at inside the hollow. Like a theme park, all the mechanicals are hidden.”

“Oh, for crying—” I zoomed in on the image. At the upper limit of magnification, there was the barest hint of detail under the mountains. “And an entrance …?”

“No way to predict how that would be designed, but I’m sure now that you know where to look, you can locate one.”

Interesting. Something to check out if we could get a scanning drone into position. I sat back and made a gesture for him to continue.

Steven examined the hologram in silence for several more mils, then pointed at one of the impellers under a river segment. “I don’t think you’ve correctly characterized the river system, Will. This isn’t one river, it’s four. Alternately going in opposite directions. The tributaries and feeders allow the rivers to exchange contents, but if you check the impeller configurations, there are two main flow directions. And note how, at the segment boundaries, the rivers coalesce into four straits running through the mountain barriers. Two in each direction.”

I examined the hologram in silence. Steven appeared to be correct. We’d completely missed the fact that the impellers were pointing in two opposite directions. “I guess it makes sense. There’s no logical reason to give one direction priority over the other. This way, you can go downstream in either direction by just switching river systems.”

Steven examined the hologram for several more full seconds, then pointed to the radiators on the dark side of the strand. “Heat dispersal is, of course, a problem. The topopolis by its nature is a mostly closed system, and the artificial sun simply dumps more heat into the habitat. They’ve designed things to extract heat through an exchange system with the outer shell that actually generates electricity from the gradient—brilliant. Then it’s transferred to the cooling fins on the outer shell to be radiated into space. I imagine the heat signature would be significant.”

“Significant enough to be seen from light-years away,” I said, smiling. Steven was hitting it out of the park.

He continued to examine the document, but appeared to have extracted all the revelations he could. He finally sighed, sat back, and gestured at the image. “Can I get a copy of this? Could I use it in my lectures?”

“I don’t see why not. It’s not a secret. Although there’s some controversy in the Bobiverse about whether we should even be getting involved.”

Steven snorted. “You’d think being dead would free you from the dictates of politics. But apparently it’s even more inevitable than death or taxes. Do you know that I endure protests regularly?”

My eyebrows went up in surprise. “Protests? At the university?”

“Yes. There is some sentiment that I shouldn’t be taking up a position that could be filled by a living human being.”

“Unbelievable.” I shook my head. “And the university’s position?”

“They take the stance that they will consider replacing me when a replacement candidate is found with my qualifications.”

“Eminently logical. Probably drives the protestors crazy.”

Steven smiled. “Which is why I am so hopeful that your brother Howard’s human/android interface project will show some early success.”

“I—what?” Apparently, Howard had his fingers in more pies than I knew. “I’m visiting him after I leave here. I’ll certainly ask him about that.” I shifted forward in my chair. “Thank you very much, Professor Gilligan. You’ve been a great help.”

Steven waved off the compliment. “It is my job, after all. But you don’t have to leave just yet, do you? I’d love to learn more about the Bobiverse, as you call it.”

“Not at all. What would you like to know?” I wasn’t in a big hurry, and a little quid pro quo wasn’t unreasonable.



The conversation with Professor Gilligan had been fascinating, and he had extracted a promise from me to keep him updated, and possibly even invite him into the group. I would have to discuss that with the others, but the professor had a large knowledge set and, in my opinion, would be an asset.

Meanwhile, Howard was next on my list. I wanted to talk with one of the other Bobs about some personal issues, and Howard seemed like the best idea, since he lived in human society full-time. The conversation with Professor Gilligan just added more fuel. I pinged Howard and received an invitation and a manny address.

I entered the manny, and in seconds I was stepping out of the pod in Howard and Bridget’s apartment. Bridget waved at me from her seat and went back to what she was doing. She appeared to be working on a computer, but the monitor was virtual, floating in the air in front of her. Parts of the image were typical 2D info, but other parts were 3D, and appeared to pop out from the image. It was not only holographic, but also touch-sensitive. I checked my libraries and realized this was a breed of computer called a Canvas. Quite neat. Almost as good as the metaphors we used in virt.

“Hey, Will,” Howard said, motioning me to the couch. “What’s cooking?”

I sat, glanced down at my hands, and realized I was in a generic manny. I wasn’t sure why, but I’d been expecting to find myself in a Bob model. I held up my hands. “Uh …”

“Sorry, bud. If you wanted a Bob manny you’d have to pick one up from the public storage pods. We’ve got a couple—”

“Public storage pods?”

“Generic and custom mannies, stored for individuals and organizations according to need, or available for rental. Just like vehicles. We—by which I mean the Bobiverse—maintain a couple of Bob mannies in all major cities in human space. The monthly storage cost is trivial.”

“Paid in what?” I said, then held up my hand before Howard could answer. “Sorry, I came to ask you a couple of questions, and the questions are multiplying faster than I can even articulate them. I’ve been pretty much sidelined on Valhalla for a couple of decades now, Howard, and I feel like a hermit who has just hiked back down to civilization to discover cell phones.”

Howard grinned at my discomfiture. Even Bridget smiled briefly without turning around. Listening with at least one ear, apparently.

“Okay, well, to answer the last question first, pams. They’re a unit of currency that has been adopted across human space. Stands for printer/autofactory minutes. Basically, it’s the value of one minute of autofactory time.”

“But that’s ridiculous. You can just print more autofactories, and you’ll have—”

“More available autofactory minutes, but with reduced value due to inflation. Like a government back on Earth printing more currency. In fact, very much the same type of feedback systems. An economist from the 21st century would get it right away. The threat of reducing the value of a pam demotivates companies from making too many autofactories.”

I waved it away. “Okay, it makes sense, I guess. But I wanted to ask about something Professor Gilligan said—something about baseline humans being able to wear a manny? He said the research was being done here. By you.”

“Not quite true. I’m”—Howard glanced at Bridget—“we are financing it. It would avoid another situation like the Prometheus expedition …” Howard was silent for a moment, and I nodded in sympathy. The deaths had been hard on Howard and Bridget. “… as well as forestall some of the anti-manny sentiment going around these days.”

“Steven said something about that. University protests?”

Howard snorted. “Wow, you really have been out of it. Your professor friend lectures at the Vulcan university using a manny. There have been pretty regular protests against his presence. The gist seems to be that he’s dead and shouldn’t be taking up a spot that could be available for someone still living. That’s the most common complaint, but by no means the only one. Even just wandering around in a manny, you might find yourself being picketed.”

I put my head in my hand. “Oh, for chrissake. And how widespread is this?”

“Pretty localized right now, Will. But we’re of the opinion that it’ll just get worse as more replicants start using mannies. I’m hoping that if we can make the mannies usable by humans, then it’s no longer an ‘us versus them’ situation.”

“Unbelievable.” I shook my head. “I always thought your experience with Bridget’s daughter Rosie was just an aberration—an isolated incident. Not so much, maybe.”

“’Fraid not. It’s the standard ‘other’ prejudice. We’re immortal, stronger, faster, don’t get tired, and are generally just more capable than a bio. No surprise there’s concern about being displaced.” Howard paused and appeared uncomfortable for a moment, then deliberately continued in a lighter tone. “Anyway, it’s nowhere near ready for prime time, but the process works, at least in the lab. We use focused magnetic stimulation to, first, activate the brain regions that cause paralysis during sleep and, second, stimulate sensory regions with input from the manny and at the same time pick up intentional muscle cues.”

“So it’s like the subject is dreaming, but they’re awake, and everything is rerouted to the manny.”

“Exactly. All you need is a headset.”

“And it would be like that Bruce Willis movie, Surrogates.”

“Well, eventually. As I said, we haven’t worked all the bugs out.”

I nodded, impressed. “Jeez, Howard, you’re turning into a real mogul.”

Howard grinned. “You know what moguls are, right?”

“Uh …”

“The buried bodies of forty-something men who took up snowboarding.”

I laughed, then stopped abruptly. “Wait, you haven’t—”

“Yes,” Bridget said from her computer. “He has. We have a place up in New Fairbanks. He’s totalled four mannies already, trying to master the terrain park.”

Howard and I grinned at each other without comment. Definitely not mature.





17. First Day in Heaven’s River

Bob

June 2334

Heaven’s River

Five furred mannies packed into a full-sized drone’s cargo bay, breathing vacuum. Bill, Garfield, Bridget and I formed the primary expedition group, and Will was running the backup manny. Once we made it into the interior of Heaven’s River, we would hide the extra manny in case of future need. We hoped we wouldn’t lose anyone in the operation and find ourselves needing the spare. If we lost two, we would probably abort and re-evaluate our entry strategy.

The cargo door stood open, giving us a view of a solid wall of, well, something. Even with my eyes cranked up to full photomultiplier setting, I couldn’t make out detail. It could be concrete or smooth rock. It might even have color. Direct center on the framed view was an even darker circle, which I knew led through a hundred yards of tunnel to the gap between the inner and outer shells.

We couldn’t activate any lights, of course. The cargo drone had the usual ice core to keep its heat signature down, but having the cargo bay open was doubtless interfering with that tactic. At the levels of sensitivity that such things operated under, even the small amount of infrared radiating from the dark side of the topopolis strand would be adding to our heat load. Our mannies weren’t heat sunk either, so we glowed like miniature stars in infrared. We had to make the traverse to the entry tunnel as quickly as possible. While it was unlikely that any Boojum would pick that exact moment to do a sweep, we were all firm believers in the power of Murphy.

“Moving into position,” Gandalf said over the intercom. “Bob, you jump when I say. Everyone else, follow at three-second intervals. Roamers will catch you if you screw the pooch. Don’t do that.”

I winked at Garfield, who was second in line. I wasn’t sure how the autonomous systems translated that, but he smiled back. Or the Quinlan equivalent.

“Now.”

I crouched, aimed, and launched. The Quinlan form wasn’t particularly what you’d call a leaping-friendly physique, but the O/S adapted without effort. I sailed the short distance to the hole in the wall and caught the edge. I had three seconds to get out of Garfield’s way, so I scrambled into the darkness.

I felt the slight vibration as Garfield landed behind me. Very tiny, dim LED lamps lit the path forward. I didn’t have any physical experience with zero-G movement, but the underwater reflexes of the manny seemed to translate well. I was able to move down the tunnel with only the occasional touch to correct my course.

The tunnel was a tight fit. The Gamers had done the minimum amount of cutting required to get us through. Good strategy—the less we disturbed the regolith, the better. Fortunately they’d allowed room for Quinlan plus backpack. Quinlans didn’t go in for clothes, except some ceremonial decorations, but the most common fashion accessory by far was a backpack. Lots of pockets, and given the Quinlans’ preferred method of getting around, the backpacks were designed to be waterproof and watertight when closed. We had designed ours to look as nondescript as possible, and used, so we wouldn’t look like we’d just walked out of a sporting-goods store.

We each had a standard kit consisting of common Quinlan items like dried snacks, a comb, some first-aid supplies, and a claw-file. But the most important item, and one we anticipated actually needing, was a good supply of the local money. All strictly mundane from a Quinlan point of view.

“Everyone’s in,” Gandalf reported. “Good luck.”

We would be in constant contact through SCUT, but from this point on there would be no possibility of any physical intervention. We were truly on our own. If one of us “died,” they were off the team, at least until they could catch up to the rest of us in the spare.

Will could substitute if one of us couldn’t be available to run their manny at any point. For that reason, he had to monitor the party’s progress so that he was always up to date on current events, but it would only take a few seconds once a day to review logs.

I came out of the tunnel and grabbed a convenient anchor cable that the Gamers had laid for us, alongside more of the low-power lights. I moved a few yards along to make room for the others, then looked up. And froze in place.

Heaven’s River consisted of a stationary outer shell made of regolith interwoven with structural members and some kind of 3D carbon-fiber mesh, and a rotating inner shell made of a combination of metal and ceramics forming some kind of metamaterial, reinforced with the same carbon mesh. What I hadn’t realized, or maybe hadn’t paid attention to before, was the fact that the space between the two shells was only about ten yards. Since the structure was fifty-six miles in radius, the curve of either shell wasn’t discernible from my vantage point. But I could tell which way was which because the inner shell was rotating.

At over a half a mile per second.

From my point of view, I was standing about ten yards from a surface moving at about nineteen hundred and fifty miles per hour. Telling myself this was an illusion didn’t help. And it didn’t matter how smooth that surface was; if I came into contact with it, it would be like leaning against a giant grinding wheel. Not to mention that I’d get kicked into a spin that would probably rip my limbs off. And my part in the expedition would be over before it even started.

I unlocked my gaze and said to the others, “Be really, really careful coming out of the tunnel. Seriously.”

In another minute, we were all gathered on the inner surface of the outer shell, collectively holding on to the anchor cable. Each person spent a few solid seconds staring at the spectacle. I didn’t hurry them. It was important for the point to sink in.

“Moving along now.” Matching action to words, I began moving along the surface, being very careful to keep my grip on the rope and my feet on the ground. I knew for a fact I couldn’t actually hear the shell rotating above my head or feel its vibrations. If there had been any vibration strong enough to be transmitted through the bearings, the whole thing would have already ripped itself apart. Still, my mind inserted a bass hum into the silence.

The tunnel, by necessity, couldn’t be too close to the Boojum entry bay or someone would inevitably spot activity. And we’d had to be extremely careful about cleaning up after ourselves during excavation. The Heaven’s River maintenance ecosystem included scavengers that patrolled the space between the shells, looking for detritus. So we had a significant hike from the tunnel to the elevator assembly. Most of the mechanism was sunk into the outer shell—the inner shell was still only thirty feet away, but a rail system just ahead of us would accelerate a container to mate with the inner shell when going in, or decelerate the container to mate with the outer shell when coming out.

Over the months since our first venture using drones, the Gamers had continued to analyze the circuitry that controlled the rail system. Things that could be bypassed had been identified, things that could be replaced with our components had been reverse-engineered. Unfortunately, at the end of the exercise, we couldn’t be confident that activating the elevator wouldn’t set off alarms somewhere. So we were still going to have to ride to the inner shell, one at a time, in a small mining drone.

The Gamers had brought in two of the drones to dig down into the regolith in order to get at the rail system. Now they would be used to fly in the expedition members. As mentioned, if we lost two mannies, we were hooped.

We worked our way down the trench, still holding onto the rope. At the end was a complex set of structural girders, with what had to be magnetic bearings along the working rails. With the amount of study and brainstorming we’d done, the structure was as familiar as the inside of my own Heaven vessel.

“Another vulnerable point, people,” Gandalf said. “You have to go one at a time. While it is extremely unlikely that the elevator system will be activated, if it does, we’ll almost certainly lose someone. Even if you don’t get run over by a rampaging elevator, just having the elevator’s maglev bearings active will probably trash the drone. So let’s keep our flippers crossed.”

“Oh, ha ha,” Bridget replied. “They aren’t flippers.”

Of course the biologist would get all uppity about that.

We kept to the same order, so I was first through the mechanism. There wasn’t much to it. Climb in, let the hatch close, try to avoid claustrophobia (it made a closet feel spacious), wait for the drone to fly to the elevator terminal, and rinse, repeat.

The flight was harrowing, because I felt like nothing more than a sack of potatoes. If something went south, I’d be metal filings before I even realized it. The drone had to fly a carefully calculated semicircular path with a radius of fifty-six miles, with no deviation of more than a couple of feet, while accelerating from zero to nineteen hundred and fifty miles per hour. Piece of cake.

About two minutes in, there was a clang, and I yelled “Fuck!” No one heard me, of course, because I was in a vacuum. And in space, no one can hear you curse. Rolling my eyes at my own irrelevant commentary, I asked, “What the hell was that? Am I dead?”

“Sorry, Bob,” Gandalf replied. “Slight miscalculation. You glanced off one of the support struts. The drone will need its paint touched up.”

“And its cargo area hosed out,” I muttered to myself.

After several eternities, the cargo door opened, and I stepped out onto the same maintenance platform that I’d previously visited through the spy drones.

“I’m here,” I announced, probably unnecessarily. The drone had already lifted off and was heading back to pick up its next passenger. There wasn’t enough room in the rail system to fly both drones, one coming and one going, so this would be a long, slow operation. Kind of a combination terror/boredom thing, both at the same time.

We had to use the manual airlock systems, so the air cycling took a long time. Once through the airlock, I found myself in the same long corridor, with the same exhortations for idiots. I sat the manny down and started checking my logs.

After about two hours, everyone was through. Terror slash boredom. I signaled silently, and we moved to the end of the corridor.

“Gandalf, any particular instructions?” He would be monitoring our video and audio feeds, so he knew where we were.

“No,” he replied. “There are no alarm switches on the emergency staircase. Still don’t know about the elevators. Of course, you can always volunteer to test it …”

On the one hand, the stairs would probably be a better idea. On the other hand, they’d flown a spy drone up the stairwell, and it was twenty stories to the top. That sounded suspiciously like exercise.

But getting caught at this stage would not only be a huge setback, it would be embarrassing as hell. With a heavy sigh, I headed for the stairs.

Ten minutes later, we reached the top. I cracked open the stairway door and peered out. No guards, drones, or orcs. We slipped through the stairwell door and paused as one to take in the view.

The foyer was huge, and the front façade was impressive. This whole building had been designed with the idea in mind that many, many Quinlans would be coming and going. It wasn’t quite Grand Central Station, but it was definitely a full-on transit hub. The ceiling was high, the floor was some kind of faux marble, there was art on the walls, and there were sculptures. I couldn’t see anything out-and-out abstract, but the Quinlans definitely applied spin to their literalist tendencies. The paintings tended toward an Escher or Dali kind of surrealism. The sculptures reminded me more than anything else of West Coast native art—basic shapes, intricately decorated.

One thing was sure—this was no phlegmatic, stolid culture.

I noticed one additional detail. The station featured a roll-up door at the front, originally meant to allow the maximum space for entry. It appeared management wasn’t just depending on electronic alerts to keep the natives out. The door mechanism had been welded into immobility. No one would be opening that door, or even repairing it. It would need to be cut out and replaced.

I pulled up my map, and the heads-up pointed me to a corner of the entrance hall, via a path that would keep me out of view of any cameras. Garfield was already on his way there, having had enough of art.

The drones had cut a small hole in a wall panel, down near floor level on the inside. It was below grade on the outside, though, so some tunneling had been required. The Gamers had bolted on a hatch, presumably so that wildlife wouldn’t start making itself at home.

Garfield opened the hatch and looked through, then motioned to me. I peered into the gloom on the other side and realized I was looking at an earthen tunnel. We would basically have to crawl out on hands and—oh, wait, Quinlans were quite comfortable on all fours. Well, score one for us.

Still, we’d be working our way up a trench on the outside to get to ground level. I wondered if it would be worthwhile to ask why, but I figured it was more about keeping our comings and goings as invisible as possible. Opening and closing an obviously bolted-on door in plain sight would attract all kinds of attention, none of it the good kind. Assuming there was a good kind.

I couldn’t help feeling like I was in a World War II flick, playing ze French Resistance. But eventually, we were outside. This was my first real look at the inside of Heaven’s River. I stopped and gawked like a tourist. I could feel the others do the same as they came through, but I wasn’t willing to spare any cycles to acknowledge the fact.

With a radius of fifty-six miles, Heaven’s River didn’t at all resemble the usual depictions of O’Neill cylinders where the landscape looms like a cliff in two directions. The land in the spin direction was just starting to show a curve at the point where it faded out into the distance. The fact that it curved up instead of dropping like a normal horizon was disconcerting, but you had to really be looking for it to notice.

Clouds formed in several layers, indicating that there was real weather in the habitat. The clouds cast shadows on the land below or on lower cloud layers. I engaged my telescopic vision (no, really) and spotted a rainstorm in the middle distance. The thunderhead formed a horizontal cyclonic pattern oriented along the axis of the topopolis. Expected, but still freaky for someone raised on a planet.

Within range of clear sight, rolling hills dominated, interspersed with valleys and plains. I saw occasional stands of trees, but no real forests in the immediate area. I knew from the scans, though, that terrain varied significantly. I wasn’t surprised. Given more than three hundred billion square miles of available space, making it all farmland would take a supreme failure of imagination.

And it wasn’t a sterile diorama. We could clearly see herds of, well, something, in the open areas. Slow waves propagated through the herds as some unseen stimulus caused brief mass movements. Vast flocks of bird-equivalents wheeled and darted across the sky, unfazed by issues of Coriolis force or odd horizons.

And snaking through the lowlands was the river. Or to be more accurate, one branch of one of the four rivers. Interestingly, the meandering path, with all the splitting and rejoining, meant that they were, collectively, considerably longer than four billion miles of total length, not even counting the tributaries. I could feel myself boggling at the thought and had to remember that this was just a question of scale, not technology.

I finally managed to tear my gaze away long enough to glance at my companions. Each one was standing, silently taking in the panorama. I smiled for a moment, glad that being a bunch of computer simulations hadn’t dulled our collective sense of wonder.

Garfield looked up and grunted, and I followed his gaze. The sky was actually blue, which seemed odd, and there was something that looked like a sun, which seemed really odd. “Does anyone know how they manage the fake sky?” he asked of the group in general.

Bill turned to follow Garfield’s gaze. “Wow, nice. The Skippies have all the SUDDAR scans. I’ll ask them.”

He had spoken in English, given the words Skippies and SUDDAR. “Should use Quinlan, Bill,” Bridget said. “Even if you have to phoneticize the occasional English word. We can’t afford to stand out.”

Bill nodded—well, the Quinlan equivalent—by way of reply.

“I’ve seen simulations of objects on ballistic trajectories in an O’Neill cylinder–type of environment,” Bridget continued. “They behave in a very counterintuitive manner. Are we going to have problems with that?”

“Not really,” Bill replied. “It’s all about the radius of the structure. Those simulations—I’ve seen them, too—are all based on a radius of a few hundred yards to maybe a quarter mile. With a fifty-six mile radius, this structure will give us something so close to real planetary gravity that we won’t normally notice a difference. You could play a game of baseball, for instance, and not have to worry about the ball acting funny.”

“That’s good,” Bridget replied. “The Quinlans will have grown up with it, but if we acted surprised at some behavior, it might ‘out’ us.”

“Are the natives going to be that suspicious? And observant?”

“We don’t know, Gar. Don’t forget, this may look like a pre-industrial society, but they come from a civilization at least as advanced as Earth in the 21st century. And we don’t know what politics are going on in the background. What if, as seems quite possible given the welded door back there, there’s an adversarial relationship between the general population and the Heaven’s River management? They might be on the lookout for strangers behaving oddly.”

“Huh. I guess I hadn’t thought that through,” Garfield said. “Okay, boss lady.”

The entrance foyer was located a mile or so downriver and slightly uphill of the nearest village. I pointed in that direction. “We should head to, uh …”

“Garack’s Spine,” Bill replied. “No idea why it’s named that. Most locals just refer to it as Garack. It’s situated on the Arcadia River. The other three, in order, looking spinward, are Utopia, Paradise, and Nirvana.”

“No theme there,” Garfield commented wryly.

“As usual,” Bill replied, “these are English names that are the closest we could come to the Quinlan concepts. But yes, there is a theme, including the name Heaven’s River. I think this was intended to be just that.”

I broke the brief silence that followed. “All very interesting, but right now we have to figure out what to do with Will’s manny.”

“I vote for a five-person group,” Will said.

“Not a good idea, Will,” Bridget replied. “A sabbat larger than four would attract attention. Not look at the perverts level, more like hey, look at the five-person sabbat level. We don’t want to stand out.”

“Yeah, okay. I’m supposed to be backup driver anyway. How about I just go back in the tunnel and plug up the entrance?”

Bill nodded. “That’ll work. Also hides the tunnel, which is a bonus.”

“Great,” I said. “Well, let’s go. We need a place to stay, until we can get our bearings.”

Will headed back to the tunnel, and the rest of us set off toward the village, Bill in the lead. Bridget kept veering off and investigating. Flora, fauna, insect life, it was all fascinating. Well, biologist, right? Howard always complained about her monomaniacal focus, but it was one of the things he loved about her.

The local flora didn’t look all that strange. I’m sure Bridget was cataloguing all the ways in which it was unique, but to a non-professional like me, it was just plants. This ecosystem had evolved around chlorophyll, so even the colors reminded me of Earth.

The insect life, not so much. Exoskeletal body plans seemed to be the rule for the small fauna that filled that particular part of the ecosystem, but that was about where the resemblance ended. The local insects seemed to go in for a radial body structure rather than bilateral symmetry. The contortions that evolution went through to enable flight with that kind of material to work with had produced some truly bizarre structures. I was glad I’d never been prone to creature-feature nightmares.

We’d been walking for about ten minutes when Bridget called for us to stop. “My fault, guys. I’m supposed to be the expert, and I’ve already screwed up.”

The rest of us glanced at each other quizzically before turning back to her. “Okay,” I said. “I’ll bite. You’ve screwed up how?”

“Quinlans aren’t great walkers. Not for long distances, anyway. We should have gone down on all fours by now, and even so, we should be resting more often.”

“Jeez, Bridge, we’re alone—”

“If we can see the village, the village can see us. I don’t know if they have telescopes or something similar, but if they do, we’re already behaving oddly.”

“So we should go quadruped—”

“More than that, Garfield. Do you smell that?”

Garfield frowned, and we all sniffed the air. “What’s that?” he asked. “Water?”

“Yep. Running water. It smells different than standing water—”

“Seriously?”

“Yes, Bill. Even Earth animals could tell the difference. It’s only a surprise to creatures with atrophied smellers, like humans.”

“Okay. So, water …”

“Even more than they are inclined to travel on all fours, Quinlans are inclined to travel in water.”

“Ohhhh ….” Bill said. “So we should be swimming.”

“Yup. This way.” Without waiting for further discussion, Bridget marched off in the direction of the water. Well, marched to the extent that something like a fat weasel could be said to march. More of a determined waddle.

After a few moments, she dropped to all fours. The rest of us followed suit. I was pleasantly surprised to discover that we were able to move considerably faster this way. And some of the odd design details of the Quinlan backpack started to make more sense.

In less than a minute, we’d come upon a small stream. “Doesn’t look big enough to swim in,” Bill opined.

“Not for a human, flailing around with those gangly limbs in all directions,” Bridget replied with a laugh. “But with the tail, we’re basically torpedoes. Watch.”

Bridget dove into the stream with hardly a ripple. There was a sort of surge in the stream’s surface, like those movies involving an underwater monster. Less than two seconds later, she popped up about thirty yards upstream. “Ta-dah!”

I thought back to our swim together on that first day on Quin, and felt excitement overtake me. Perhaps that was part of the Quinlan persona, but it was also part Bob. I’d never been a good swimmer, nor very comfortable in the water. I considered swimming to be something you did as an alternative to drowning. Now, in an android replica of a semiaquatic species, I could own that water. Or something like that.

Bridget shot past us in the downstream direction, undulating just at the surface. I laughed with delight and dove in. I heard other splashes behind me, but didn’t try to count them. Anyone who declined would be left behind and would have to hoof it.

I caught up to Bridget and slapped her tail. She responded by smacking me on the head with the appendage, then shooting off around a submerged rock.

So, that’s the way it’s going to be, is it? We shot through the water, upstream, downstream, looping around the others, tagging and being tagged. The stream, so small from land, seemed an entire country from this perspective, with the third dimension available to maneuver in.

One by one, the others joined the game, until the water was frothing with Quinlan bodies dodging, breaching, and chasing each other. The game lasted almost ten minutes, until my heads-up display informed me that a proper Quinlan would be exhausted and would need to spend some quality time floating. I could have ignored it—the android body never got tired—but Bridget would have something to say in that case.

I rose to the surface and turned onto my back. The motion seemed natural, and I’d seen images from the spy drones of Quinlans floating in this pose. “Otters,” I muttered, as the others popped up one by one. We linked up, grabbing with forepaws or hindpaws to form a raft of Quinlans, slowly rotating as we floated downstream.

“Okay, that was insane,” Bill exclaimed. “Bridget, you might want to let Howard know about this. He’ll probably be able to figure out a way to turn it into a business.”

“Heaven’s River tours?” Bridget waggled her ears at him, a sign of amused agreement to a Quinlan. “I think they’d be popular, and not just with the Bobs. Maybe even some of the second-wave replicants. It might jar them out of their VR-only existence.”

“Heads up, people. You’re coming up on the village.”

At Will’s announcement, we all turned to look downstream. Sure enough, we were around the last bend and would soon be floating through the small burg. We unlinked and torpedoed to the nearest pedestrian dock.

Shore infrastructure was one of the many differences between Quinlan culture and anything else we were used to. They used waterways the way humans would use sidewalks and roads, which meant that there were pedestrian docks and boat docks where the waterway was wide enough. The latter were little different from what you’d find on Earth, or for that matter, on Pav or New Pav. Quinlans used mostly sailboats of a generally catamaran-like design, although I’d seen images of a couple of more barge-like variants that used the local beasts of burden to turn a paddle wheel.

Interestingly, this town did not have canals, so roads were the only method of moving around. I frowned for a moment, then realized that the actual soil wouldn’t be all that deep. If the Quinlans tried to dig canals, they’d likely run into shell material before they got deep enough to matter. All terrain contouring would have to be baked into the shape of the shell during construction.

The pedestrian docks were essentially a set of half-submerged ramps that allowed the Quinlans to swim up then walk out. They could shoot out of the water like a penguin and land on their feet, but it was considered impolite in crowded situations, since you could easily find yourself in a pileup for the same patch of dock. The Quinlans had a word for the move—poot—which the Skippies had translated as up-diving.

We walked up the ramp and moved out of the way quickly. The ramps were busy, and Quinlans seemed to have a low tolerance for queuing up. Most simply dove off the nearest edge, and at any moment a few more impatient souls took to up-diving, braving the black looks of their peers. As I watched, one miscreant hopped out of the water, only to be straight-armed right back in by someone occupying that particular patch of space-time. As we headed for solid ground, I could hear voices raised in anger behind me.

“Want to stay and watch the fights?” Garfield muttered with a smirk.

“Better not,” Will interjected. “Hugh commented that Quinlans are inclined to mob. A simple fight between two people can escalate quickly for no good reason.”

“More so than humans?” Garfield asked.

“Maybe. How about that? Humanity dethroned as Most Likely to Be Stupid in Large Groups.”

I grinned but didn’t bother to respond. Will had ended up with a particularly negative view of the human species after his adventures in getting the last of them off the dying Earth. Other than our relatives, whom he continued to dote on, he had very little time for the general run of humanity.

“Head’s up,” Bridget interjected. “Cops.”

We all prairie-dogged—brilliant move, way to play it cool, guys—as a heavyset Quinlan sporting an ornate sash swaggered up to us. I struggled to keep my face and ears impassive. A waddling swagger was a truly impressive sight.

He took a moment to look us over, his gaze lingering on Bridget. She stared back at him impassively, neither challenging nor acquiescing. I had to admit, it was a nice balancing act.

But if he talked down to her, we might be leaving town in a hurry. Or on a rail.

“You folks just passing through?”

I stepped forward. By prior agreement, I would be the spokescritter for the group. “We are, good sir. We’re on a sabbatical, making our way slowly downriver.”

“Where from?”

“Hand of Ar,” I replied. “I doubt you’ve heard of it. Our last few stops hadn’t.”

I was taking a chance, but maybe not a large one. Quinlans were far more mobile than Anglo-Saxon peasants, for instance, but mass transportation was still unknown, as far as we could tell. And the high-speed transport built into Heaven’s River was inaccessible to the residents in every segment we’d investigated.

“More sabbatarians.” The cop screwed up his face in apparent distaste. “If you plan on staying for more than a couple of days, you’ll have to register with the magistrate. Otherwise, stick to the transient hotels and eateries along the docks. And don’t cause trouble, or you’ll be leaving earlier than planned.” He gave us a final once-over, nodded again, and swaggered away.

“Did you notice the weapon?” Bridget asked.

We muttered acknowledgements. “Couldn’t tell exactly what particular style of sword,” I said. “But the scabbard had a certain short-sword look to it.”

“That means they do some metalwork. Which means they have metal. Other than the money, I mean.”

Garfield cocked his head quizzically. “Uh, maybe I should have read the prelims more thoroughly. This is a surprise why?”

“What’re they going to do, mine it?” I glared at him. “It’s like Ringworld, right? No mineral wealth, no oil deposits. Unless they actually scavenge from the structure, they’re limited to recycling what they already have. And there’s very little actual metal in the structure, even if they were that stupid.”

“Which means metal is going to be very valuable.”

“The megastructure administration could be supplying metal in small quantities,” Bill said. “Maybe pushing out nuggets at stream heads, for instance. Although that would produce messy industries engaged in harvesting it.”

Bridget nodded. “In any case, dedicating all that metal to a sword tells me that the sword is really, really necessary. Either as a symbol, or a threat, or a weapon.”

We’d been walking through the village as we talked, looking for a motel, or local equivalent. Without warning, a Quinlan quartet spilled out of what might have been a bar. The ball-o-Quinlans was rolling around like a bunch of angry cats, kicking and biting and scratching. And swearing. Quinlan cursing was both inventive and energetic. The Quinlan language allowed some forms of declension that went well with cursing, including a noun form that indicated it was the subject of an action.

One of the Quinlans was ejected from the mass, mostly by accident, and leaped to his feet. He glared around, teeth bared, and spotted Bridget, who had the bad luck to be within arm’s reach. He snarled at her and cocked his arm for a full claw rake.

Without so much as a lead-up, Bridget popped him straight in the snout. He went over backward with a shriek of dismay and the other Quinlans stopped in mid-action.

Bridget showed her teeth to the group. “Anyone else?”

The group untangled and helped their fourth, who was holding his snout, to his feet. “What was that?” one of them said.

“My business card,” Bridget replied. “I have more than enough for everyone.” She paused, and when no response was forthcoming, she stalked off without waiting for us.

We made to follow, and I shrugged at one of the combatants as I walked past. He muttered to me, “When mating season comes, friend, choose carefully.”

I wasn’t quite sure what to make of that, so I didn’t respond.

Garfield, meanwhile, had moved ahead and turned into an establishment with a carving of a bed over the door. By the time I caught up, he was engaged in earnest conversation with what must be the proprietor.

We waited, and moments later he rejoined us. “We’re in luck. This establishment has private rooms large enough for our group. Highly sought-after, according to our host, which is why he wanted a ruinously high nightly rate. We compromised on an only mildly scandalous weekly rate.” He held up a key. “Only one key, though, so I am the keymaster.”

Bill chuckled and Bridget, as usual, rolled her eyes. I had to wonder what life was like for her with Howard. Even for a Bob clone, he had an unusually high dose of referencitis. I hoped the eye rolls were pro forma. On the other hand, she was getting the references.



The room was “cozy,” that being the generally accepted euphemism for smaller than a closet. It consisted of a door at one end, a window at the other, and four bunk beds, two on each wall, between the door and window. And not generous bunk beds, either. A tall Quinlan wouldn’t be able to stretch out. Fortunately, we’d all gone for average dimensions, so it wasn’t an issue.

There was enough room between the beds for two people to stand at the same time, but we wouldn’t be having town hall meetings in that space. Bathroom facilities were shared by the entire floor and weren’t what I’d call luxurious either. Fortunately, the Quinlans seemed to have the concept of flush toilets, so we wouldn’t have to adjust our olfactory senses. Unfortunately, the Quinlan language didn’t have a concept of bath separate from swim, so there was a certain species-level bouquet, shall we say? Will uploaded a patch, at everyone’s request, which tuned the odor out of conscious awareness.

The short walk to our room had been interesting and instructive. This hotel seemed to cater to sabbatarians. All the rooms that we’d gotten a look at were laid out the same as ours, and most seemed to be occupied by foursomes. I wondered aloud if four was a magic Quinlan family number of some kind, and received a no from Bridget and a lecture. “The Quinlans have a complicated system that I’d characterize as a networked endogamy. People belong to a marriage group with potentially multiple male and female partners, but they could belong to more than one group. There are rules about your status and financial obligations within the group based upon whether you lived with that group or with another one.”

“So what’s with the foursomes, then?”

“It may be a cultural norm, or instinctive. Or a little of both.” Bridget shrugged. “It might simply be the practical minimum number necessary to raise a family.”

I raised an eyebrow. “That seems like an odd requirement. Why?”

Bridget made a face before explaining. “Quinlan children are raised in a crèche until they’re about five, because they aren’t sentient until then.”

“Neither are human children,” I said.

Bridget laughed. “A lot of people would agree with you, but of course that isn’t true. Human children start trying to talk in their first year. Look, humans solved the brain size problem by being born physically underdeveloped—intelligent but helpless, requiring a lot of parental support in the early years. Quinlans solved it by being born animalistic but pretty much fully mobile almost right away, with brains that mature late. By the time they start to learn to think and talk, they can already take care of themselves.”

“Wow, I can see some problems with that.”

“Yes, Bill, and you’ve almost certainly gotten it right. The children, who are called juniors, have to be kept penned up or they basically just run rampant. And someone has to care for them. So Quinlan families have to be big, to muster the resources.”

“And to make sure no one decides to eat their young,” Garfield said, sotto voce.

“Not wrong,” Bill muttered back.

Bridget smiled at them. “I have a theory that their belligerence and hair-trigger tempers as adults are related to their early development process. Humans learn cultural norms early, while they’re still helpless and dependent. Quinlans, not so much.”

“Huh. Food for thought,” I said. “Let’s get back to civilization before we continue, okay? My cultural norms include coffee.”

The others laughed, and we started to settle in. We did Rock Paper Scissors Lizard Spock for bunks, and I got one of the uppers. No biggie, right? Well, unfortunately, with the Quinlan body’s short stride, ladders were an adventure. I almost fell off the first time I tried to climb up, and Bill had to brace me. I glared at Garfield, who was already comfortable in the other upper and bared my teeth. He laughed.

“It’s late enough,” Bridget said. “Let’s get some sleep.”

Sleep was code for leaving the mannies in standby mode while we returned to VR. Each manny had a basic AMI that would alert us if something required our attention. Otherwise, the mannies would sleep like, well, like the dead.

We all doffed our mannies and gathered in my VR, Will grabbing the beanbag chair as usual. Jeeves showed up with everyone’s favorite refreshments, and we all spent a few moments enjoying the return to civilization.

“It’s going to be slow,” Bridget said. “But the first thing we have to do is find a library or hall of records or something similar. Let’s see what they have in written form. The Skippies were doing a general once-over and may have missed something that didn’t have A History of Quin in the title. And of course, they had to be careful. A group of Quinlans grabbing books won’t set off the kind of gossip that a bunch of floating balls and mechanical spiders would.”

“Assuming they have something like spiders,” Will said.

“They do. More crab-shaped, though.”

“Whatever. Anyway, we ransack their written records and try to get enough info to be able to interrogate locals without sounding like aliens.”

“Which we are.”

“Not the point,” I said. “We have to get a bead on management without revealing ourselves. It might be that we end up contacting them. It might also turn out that we have to spy on them, too. But we can’t do anything until we have at least the basics.”

“I’m just as happy if we end up actually doing what we told the cop—heading downstream.”

“I understand, Bridge, but the point for me is to find Bender. Or find out what happened to him. Let’s not lose track of that.”

“Are you sure we can’t just scan for him?”

Garfield answered, “We did a simulation. The problem is that the megastructure uses optoelectronics very similar to our technology. So every mile of topopolis will take us about twelve hours to scan, and then it’s another six hours to examine the scans in detail. That’s over a million years, worst case, just for the scanning.”

“Can’t we just build a whole bunch of scanners?”

“Yes, but we also have to build a whole bunch of us to process the scans. Even using the most efficient bootstrapping methods and ignoring questions of material availability, we’re still looking at more than a hundred and fifty years if we bring that level of resources to bear on the problem. And anyway, we don’t have that much raw material in the system, so we’d be bringing in units from out-system. So add some more time for that.”

Bill nodded and took up the story. “On the other hand, an investigative strategy might net us good results in less than a decade, at least according to Hugh.”

“Based on what?” Bridget frowned at Bill. “He can’t possibly have any statistics to work from.”

“He kind of does. Population of Heaven’s River, number of people we can contact per year, number of people who will hear about us per year … It’s a networking theory thing. Eventually there’s more than a fifty-fifty chance that we will either contact someone or be contacted by someone. Hugh says less than a decade.”

“Hmmph.” Bridget shook her head. “Okay, fine. I’m not thrilled with the alternative timeline anyway.”

“And hey, if anyone wants a break, I’m available,” Will said, grinning. “That downstream thing looked like just too much fun.”

I stood, signaling the end of the meeting. “We have six hours until we’re scheduled to wake our mannies. Take care of whatever you need to.”





18. Not Part of the Plan

Will

June 2334

Quin

I pulled myself off the rack, staggering slightly. The proportions of the Quinlan manny would take some getting used to. I was examining the not insubstantial claws on my hand when the other manny opened its eyes.

“Hey, Howard.” I held up a hand. “Dig these crazy nails.”

He gave me a frown. “You gone hippy on me, Riker?” I grinned at him and he smiled back. “Thanks for inviting me, Will. I admit I’m curious about Bridget’s project, and her description of the swimming was more enthusiastic than she generally gets about things.”

I signaled the drone to open the cargo door. “No prob. I’m curious too, although I also have a responsibility to practice in case I’m called up. That’s my story, anyway.” I gestured to the door and we walked out together.

I’d parked the drone in a different city, somewhat larger than the one Bob and Bridget had visited. And a good deal more messed up. We’d have to avoid areas with too much radiation—even the mannies weren’t immune to the damaging effects—but just about anything else could be ignored. I wanted to get a cross-section of the types of warfare that the Quinlans had waged on each other. This city had been pounded by explosives. Maybe missiles, maybe dropped bombs. Not kinetics, though. Those wouldn’t have left much to examine.

The city had likely been a capital, or at least a major hub of some kind. It had that all roads lead to Rome feel about it, at least from the air. The Quinlans had used rail for overland transport, and there were a lot of rail lines leading here.

This city also had larger blocks, with more widely spaced waterways. I wondered if that was an efficiency thing or if they just needed the bigger blocks for some other reason. According to Bob and Bill, the Quinlan psychology seemed to be very humanlike, but I was reluctant to overextrapolate.

We walked up to the nearest canal and inspected the contents. It didn’t seem too bad, certainly not as oily and turgid as Bob had described on their excursion. If anything, the canal seemed to have a surprisingly robust current.

“Looks nice,” Howard said.

“Real estate is less damaged than what you’d expect,” I replied. “Bridget took a tissue sample and had it scanned. Huge viral load, and the Skippies’ modelling indicates it was likely an engineered virus.”

“So, biological warfare on top of everything else?”

“Mm-hmm. It looks like the entire population had a tantrum and started throwing everything they had at everyone they could. I’m surprised they managed to get to this stage, technologically.”

“Maybe it’s a population density thing?”

I grunted and changed the subject. “I searched for a good, undamaged canal. With the pounding this city received, some have been filled with debris or even had their water flow blocked entirely. I figure we shouldn’t get too adventurous.”

“Sounds good. Shall we?” Without waiting for an answer, Howard dove in.

I followed immediately and spotted him, already disappearing into the distance. I pursued, tail and arm flaps working in concert. Howard glanced back without turning his head. “This is definitely worth doing. I could sell this. See the ruined world of the Quinlans. Quake at the sight of blasted cities. Gaze in awe at the—”

“I dare you to try and get that past Bridget.”

Howard laughed. “You got me there. She’d flay me alive. Okay, so maybe not tours of the Quin ruins. But even if we just copied the mannies and put them on Vulcan … mmm, maybe not.”

“What?”

I could hear the smile in Howard’s voice. “Vulcan has that dinosaur theme, and it carries into the marine life. Lots of big, hungry native critters.”

“In the rivers, maybe?”

“Maybe. Have to look into it.”

We swam in a companionable silence for a few more minutes, stopping to examine a couple of submerged wrecks. I imagined the experience would be a lot like scuba diving, except every video I’d ever seen of humans underwater showed them as slow and ungainly, struggling to push themselves through the water at a snail’s pace. The Quinlan forms moved more like otters—or maybe penguins, since the Quinlans didn’t quite have the sinuous flexibility of otters.

“Curious. The current is surprisingly strong here,” Howard said. “The city didn’t seem to have that much of a grade.”

“Um, I’m not an expert, but that seems like more of a concern than a curiosity.” I sounded like a wet blanket, even to my own ears, but I’d developed an attitude from terraforming Valhalla that unusual equaled bad. Exceptions had been rare.

“Sure, okay, it’s stronger over here. I’ll just have a—yipe!”

And this would not be one of those exceptions. “Howard? What happened?”

“I’m—oof—being sucked down—ow—a tunnel of some—argh—kind. Wait, there’s light up—oh, shit.”

I sent a quick order to the cargo drone to lift off, center itself on our location, and do a SUDDAR sweep. Meanwhile, I put some distance between myself and Howard’s last known position.

“I’m going to need a ride,” Howard said into the silence.

“What happened?”

“I just got spit out of a tunnel into midair and did a bit of flying. But not the good kind. I think I broke the manny. I’ve got my beacon on.”

“Drone has located you. One moment.” I piggybacked the drone’s video window as it lowered itself into a mostly dry canal. Spread-eagle on a bed of rocks and branches was a Quinlan form. Some of the limb positions were definitely not natural. “How did this happen?”

“I was sucked into a tunnel and got spit out here. I think I flew about fifty yards before landing. It looks like the city builders put in tunnels between canals to equalize water levels. But this canal is mostly dry. I bet it’s blocked upstream.”

In the video, roamers were collecting Howard and bundling him into the drone. “Have you checked your diagnostics?”

“Yeah, this baby is going to need some work. I’m surprised I’m still connected, honestly. The comms subsystem is tough.” There was a pause. “Don’t tell Bridget. She’ll kill me.”

I smiled, although Howard couldn’t see it. “I understand you’ve got a new red ale in the works. Riker’s Red, I think it’s called?”

“No, it’s …” Another pause. “You’re a bastard.”

“Yes, but now I’m a bastard with a red ale named after me.”





19. You Did What?

Bob

June 2334

Garack’s Spine

I activated my manny and sat up, rubbing my eyes. I wasn’t sure if it was something Quinlans did, but it felt right. I peered out the small single window. Still dark. We’d “gone to bed” yesterday while it was still light out, so we had missed the Heaven’s River sunset. I wanted to see the sunrise. Mostly, I wanted to see for myself how Heaven’s River handled emulation of night and day.

I’d woken a few minutes early to be certain I was up before the dawn, but I’d left a message with the others. Quietly—not for my crew’s sake but for the other occupants of the motel—I snuck out of our room and down the stairs to the front door.

The air felt crisp and cool and wouldn’t be out of place in early fall on Earth. Item: the artificial sun supplied heat as well as light to the habitat. That implied a heat sink of some kind at ground level, since this was otherwise a closed system. My bet was that the water was kept below ambient, probably cooled by the river-bottom impeller/filters. Maybe the central cylinder absorbed infrared as well, when the sun was off.

No one else was about. We knew that Quinlans were primarily diurnal, so no big surprise. There might be a night guard wandering around, and maybe a paperboy or something, but otherwise I pretty much had the street to myself. Or so I thought, until a voice beside me said, “Morning.”

“Morning, Bill. Had the same idea?”

“Mm-hmm. Lots of data from the drones, but nothing beats eyewitness.”

We stood quietly, watching, as a light gradually grew at one end of the gigantic cylinder that was Heaven’s River. By convention, we translated that direction as “east,” with the other compass points falling naturally into place. “North” was anti-spinward and “south” was spinward, but from inside you wouldn’t be able to tell without doing some very sensitive experiments. Under this coordinate system, this branch of the river flowed generally west.

“It’s quite directional,” Bill said into the silence.

“What?”

“The light from the central structure. In theory, we should be able to see it from hundreds of miles away, but it doesn’t become apparent until it’s relatively close. I think it’s masked in some way to only shine over a limited range.”

“Makes sense. That would also mimic the early morning and late afternoon dimming of a natural sun due to atmospheric effects.”

Finally, the sky had turned a discernible blue, and the pseudo-sun was clearly visible at an angle of perhaps ten degrees above the horizontal. It wasn’t a perfect illusion. For one thing, every point on the surface of the habitat would see the sun pass directly overhead, as if everyone was at the equator. For another, the swing across the sky wouldn’t be evenly paced. Because the pseudo-sun moved at a constant pace along the central cylinder, it would appear to accelerate as it approached local zenith, then slow down afterward. Noon would be very brief.

“But the sky is blue. Have we figured that out yet?”

Bill turned to me. “Some of it could be just light-scattering. But, yeah, you’d think we’d be able to see more of the interior. Maybe not all the way around, but more than we do.”

“It’s a hologram.”

I jerked as Will’s comment came out of the, er, blue through my comms. “What?”

“It’s a hologram. Very weak one, nondirectional, and no detail. All it does is mask the central cylinder and reinforce the blue scattering slightly, just enough to give the effect that it does, of fading out the interior in the distance.”

“That’s interesting,” Bill said. “How did you get this information?”

“Inspecting the segment scans. We found some hologram projectors on the central cylinder. Big suckers.”

“Makes sense, I guess.”

“What makes sense?”

Bill and I both turned as we heard Bridget’s voice. She and Garfield had just exited the motel, presumably looking for us.

“Will’s comment. Run through the playback, you’ll understand.”

Bridget closed her eyes and turned her face up to the sun. “Feels good. The builders put a lot of effort into making this as homey as possible.”

“Mmm, yeah. Which argues against the ‘forced colonization’ scenario, which brings us back to the question—”

“Well, you all seem to be up very early. Got somewhere special to be?”

We all turned—again—at this latest unexpected voice. It was the cop, the same cop, that we’d run into yesterday. I wondered for a moment if maybe he was a manny and didn’t need sleep. But in a small town, there were probably only a few members of law enforcement, so maybe back-to-backs weren’t that unusual.

“Just discussing breakfast, sir,” I said, trying to project hungry.

“There are lots of eateries along here, gents—and lady—but most won’t be open yet. Best find a place to plant your behinds that doesn’t leave you in the middle of the street blocking traffic, while you wait.” He glared at us significantly.

What traffic? The street was virtually deserted, except for our group. Wow, this guy was a bit of a dick. “Yes sir, we need to get our morning routine going anyway.” I turned to head back to the motel, but the cop stopped me with a truncheon pressed against my chest. Yes, a billy club. One of those things cops always carry in cartoons.

“Best you be behaving yourselves here on in. I don’t want to have to notice you again. You understand?”

I remembered Fred from my time with the Deltans, and fantasized for a moment about grabbing this doofus by the throat and hoisting him in the air. But the feeling passed in a mil or two, and my manny showed no outward sign of the internal struggle. “Yes sir, not a problem.”

The cop examined us for a moment longer, then turned and walked away. Garfield rolled his eyes and grinned. “We’s juvenile delinquents, we is. Cor!”

Bridget glared at him. “That was the worst attempt at a Cockney accent I’ve ever heard. Unless you were going for Irish, in which case it was even worse. Don’t do that again.”

I chuckled. “How often does Howard do that?”

“Daily. And he says it never gets old.”

We returned to our closet, er, room, and sat. “Suggestions?” I asked.

“Why don’t we just split up for the moment?” Bill replied. “This isn’t Thunderdome, it’s a small, peaceful village. Just wander around and eavesdrop. Maybe one of us will pick up a lead, or at least some useful information.”

“Reasonable,” Garfield replied. “I vote for that.”

No one seemed inclined to argue. “Okay. Let’s give it an hour to keep Officer Friendly off our backs, then we’ll head out.”

An hour was plenty of time to get things done in the Bobiverse. We set our mannies on standby and went home.



An hour later, I had successfully hunted down breakfast, of sorts, at a nearby pub slash eatery. Quinlans didn’t really differentiate.

I looked down at the plate of fish parts and tried to control my face. The barkeep wasn’t pranking me—other Quinlans had similar fare in front of them.

“Something wrong?” he said, eyeing me.

“No, I just realized how often I’ve had squiz lately. I’ll be fine.”

He snorted and turned away. Apparently being a barkeep didn’t require empathy. Or conversational prowess.

Really, this wasn’t much different from sushi. And I’d loved sushi. I still loved sushi, and had it regularly in virt.

Hmm, nope. Not helping. It still looked like chopped-up raw fish.

With a sigh, I directed the embedded AMI to eat the meal while I backed away slightly from foreground processing. I cranked up my audio and tried to pick up something besides the snarfing, snorting sounds of Quinlan diners. They weren’t anywhere near as bad as on Pav—I’d seen Pav meals. There were many BobTube videos of Pav families eating, complete with overdubbed sports commentary. It occurred to me to wonder if the Pav had seen some of those vids. It might explain their attitude.

Still, Quinlans weren’t paragons of refined dining either.

Family discussions, gossip, who had or hadn’t been arrested for drunk and disorderly, occasional business discussions … there was plenty of talk, but it was all routine.

Mostly, anyway. I focused in on one discussion in particular, between two Quinlans:

“Another bunch of blow-ins again this week, only some of them sabbatarians. No one seems to know what’s going on.”

“I’d be less bothered by it if they spent their coin, but they all tend to be tight-fisted.”

“And surly.”

“Think they’re criminals running away from something?”

“Or maybe they’d been scattered?”

“That many? What about disbanded militia?”

“Haven’t heard of any recent battles.”

“Hmmph. Doesn’t make sense.”

Well, that was interesting. It could be just some local thing, but it was worth checking out. Especially the reference to scattered, which had been spoken with peculiar emphasis. I glanced around, trying not to be obvious about it, until I spotted the speakers. A couple of fat, older Quinlans, probably local merchants—they were wearing decorative baubles and cosmetic fur coloring that would never survive a swim. If I remembered my sociology, that was a wealth or privilege display, showing that they didn’t have to go into the water.

Maybe someone else could pick something up. “Guys, see if you can find out anything about large movements of untalkative strangers. And maybe get a definition for this slang word: scattering.”

I received acknowledgements from the others and went back to eavesdropping.

The conversation moved on to more commercial matters, unfortunately. After several more minutes I accepted that no new information was forthcoming. My meal being finished, thank the universe, I decided to go for a walk.

I stopped, taken aback, as I exited the eatery. Traffic had still been thin when I went in. Apparently Quinlans all got up at the same time. Or maybe there was a generally agreed-upon workday. For whatever reason, it was now chaos. I couldn’t detect anything like a right side/left side rule, or even sidewalk/roadway. Pedestrians dodged in and out of traffic, while animal-drawn carts maneuvered past each other and generally ignored people on foot. I eyed the draft animals, a vaguely oxlike beast that the Quinlans called a hown. They were huge and could probably crush an adult Quinlan without even noticing. Only their slow, steady gait allowed people to dodge them in apparent safety.

The carts were interesting. None of the contents were exposed. Some were covered in tarps, some were bundled and strapped down, and some carts were completely enclosed. It seemed like it would be a lot of work, as opposed to just piling stuff into the back.

I walked up behind a cart and peered in. Definitely well-attached. And since it was unlikely the howns were going to take the carts around corners on two wheels, I wondered if grab-and-run was an issue.

I was surprised by a shout. “Hey, you! Get away from my cart. Police! Thief!”

I looked up and realized the driver had been shouting at me. Jeez, hair-trigger much?

“Sir, I wasn’t—”

“Well, well, look who it is!”

That was a familiar voice, and not in a good way. I turned to find Officer Friendly leering at me, slapping his truncheon into his hand. Again with the cartoon posture, and I couldn’t help a moment of amusement. “Listen, I wasn’t—”

“I think you were, lad, and we’ll be talking about it down at the station. About-face and march.”

He attempted to prod me with his truncheon, and by reflex I swiveled my upper body to the right to let the weapon pass by. A slight nudge with my left arm ensured that the cop’s attempted jab would keep going.

He scowled and brought the truncheon back in a backhanded swipe to my head. However, since I already had control of the truncheon-carrying limb with my left arm, I simply leaned back and guided it over my head. Hundreds of seconds of virtual kung fu training were coming together, and I wanted to whoop with joy. Except, you know, cop.

And speaking of, Officer Friendly was now in full umbrage. He began yelling for backup. It took me a second to realize that backup would come, not from the police force, but from passersby. People turned to the fracas and came at me, hands out to grab. It seemed neighborhood watch was a thing.

“Guys, I seem to have gotten in trouble with the law. I think we’re all going to have to leave town. Like, now.”

Bill replied right away. “What in hell did you do?”

“Looked in a wagon. I’m not kidding, that’s all I did. Didn’t even touch it. These people really have anger-management issues.”

“Fine,” Bill replied. “We’ll meet downstream. Don’t show off, Bob. Nothing inhuman. Er, un-Quinlan. You know what I mean.”

I did. My android body was capable of speed and strength that no Quinlan could possibly match. I needed to avoid making them think there was some super-Quinlan out there.

This exchange had only taken a mil or so, and people were still coming at me. It was time to go.

I rolled off the outside of the first person’s grab, then took him around and pushed him into the next person. The push-off allowed me to reverse direction and I found myself face-to-face with another individual. His expression was just starting to register surprise when I pushed him into someone else, resulting in the beginning of a total tangle, and allowing me to change direction again. I now had people going in three different directions, trying to catch me. It took no more than a nudge to an off-balance pursuer and he was down, taking several others with him.

Now I had an open space, and I went for it, trying to keep my speed within Quinlan norms.

Right into Officer Friendly.

To his credit, he was probably used to this kind of chase. Or maybe he just guessed right. But there he was, right in the middle of my escape route. He grinned an evil grin as he opened his arms wide to keep me from going around him.

Instead, I went straight at him. Before he even had time to register shock, I straight-armed him, ran right up his chest as he went over backward, and launched off his forehead as he hit the ground. That wasn’t going to make me any friends, but then I wasn’t planning on hanging around. I had a clear shot at the river now. A short gallop to the docks, a quick leap down to the wooden deck, ending with a long dive into the drink.

I heard splashes behind me, as others gave chase. But I was out of direct sight now, and I could pour on the horses. Flat out, I hit about twice the speed of a biological Quinlan, and I didn’t have to come up for air. In seconds I was far out of their reach. They would hopefully conclude that I’d simply doubled back or otherwise lost them.

“Clear of the town. Waiting downstream,” I announced to the team.



“Hey, I have a great idea. Let’s put Bob in charge.” Bridget glared at me, but I could see her trying not to smile.

“Yeah, yeah, bring it on,” I replied. “I got’cher delinquent right here.”

We all shared a chuckle, and Bill said, “So it went from you looking in a wagon all the way to a riot?”

“In seconds,” I replied. “Literally seconds.”

“I saw the fracas as I headed for the water,” Garfield added. “There were a couple dozen people involved, all yelling. I think some of them had started to fight each other.”

We lapsed into silence. We were all floating downstream on the river, linked hands and feet in the usual Quinlan way. The current was slow, no more than a few miles per hour. Walking speed, maybe slightly more. I tilted my head and closed my eyes to absorb a little heat from the sun. It was midafternoon now, and we were far enough from Garack to finally be able to relax.

In the distance, boats moved up- and downriver. The Quinlans had sailboats, with proper triangular-sail designs, which I could see tacking back and forth as they crossed the river northward, or in beam reach as they headed up- or downriver. I noticed, though, that there was a lot more downriver traffic. I wondered if they tended to go back upriver by circling around on one of the other main rivers. That would certainly be easier, if a little more roundabout.

There were also boats that used one or more howns on a treadmill as a source of motive power. That didn’t strike me as terribly efficient, but efficiency was more of an industrial-era concern. Very probably it was more than fast enough for a pre-steam society.

“Y’know, Bob, you may have been right,” Bridget said, interrupting my reverie.

“About?”

“When you said they have anger-management issues. We saw several fights during the brief time we were in town, and no one seemed surprised. Quinlans are just naturally belligerent. More so even than humans.”

“I don’t know about belligerent,” Bill replied. “They seemed, well, polite is too strong a word. Agreeable, maybe.”

“Okay, how about short-tempered?”

“Mmm, yeah, hair-trigger tempers. Sounds about right.”

“So any luck on finding out anything new?” I asked.

“I found a bookstore. I was perusing when I suddenly had to leave town.” Garfield glared at me.

“Cool. What kind of titles?”

“Mostly fiction. Some philosophy and soft sciences. How-tos, stuff like that.” Garfield shifted his grip from a forepaw to a hindpaw and put his hands behind his head. “It’s a little jarring, because this isn’t actually an eighteenth-century society. The people, at least some of them, are aware of higher tech. They just don’t have access to it. But it’s like no one wants to bring it up.”

“Some kind of threat from management?”

“That’s all I can think of. But that implies that management is watching.”

“Which brings up the question of how.”

“Huh.” I took a moment to dunk my head and cool off. The manny could handle far more temperature variation than an actual Quinlan, but we were wired up to experience reality in as Quinlan-like a manner as possible. The sun felt good, but so did a nice soaking. “I wish we had SUDDAR scanning capability built into the mannies. We could just scan everything and look for hidden cameras.”

“Or mobile cameras,” Garfield said. “Artificial birds and such?”

“Uh, that seems like a stretch,” Bill said. “On the other hand, roamers … Hmmm.”

“Yeah. So we have to avoid looking suspicious, while looking suspiciously at everything.” I looked around and made a gesture encompassing the group. “Also, no more English conversations out loud. Any discussions like we’re having right now should be held on intercom.”

“Starting now,” Bridget added. “I don’t think anyone will be suspicious of a group of Quinlans quietly floating downstream.”

The water was calm and undisturbed, the pace slow. I had a mental image of Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer floating down the Mississippi. For all the potential issues, life as a Quinlan was probably idyllic. As a natural predator, Quinlans could feed themselves as they travelled. We didn’t know how deep the Heaven’s River ecosystem was, compared to the original Quin biosphere, but it was a safe bet that it was self-sustaining. That meant at least some predator/prey action.

And with no social media or devices, there would be no notion of being constantly online. You could literally float down the river every day, looking for the next town. Or even sleep midstream, if you preferred. It was like Eden, in many ways—a slower, more relaxed pace.

I idly watched the shoreline as we floated. Details changed, but the broad strokes didn’t. Occasional farms were visible, but agriculture didn’t form anything like as large a part of the Quinlan lifestyle and diet as with humans. I spotted small homesteads, a slight curl of smoke giving them away as often as any visible structures. Use of fire would be an unfortunate side effect of a pre-industrial civilization, but presumably there was some kind of filtering for the air.

We’d floated past a couple of splits and merges in the river system, plus the occasional feeder. I couldn’t help being impressed. The amount of detail work that had been put into this place was truly amazing. A Quinlan could spend their whole life exploring and still not know every bend and turn. Never mind a billion miles’ worth of different towns and villages on four different rivers. As prisons went, if it was indeed a prison, it could be a lot worse.

The sun moved in the sky, gaining on us in its own downstream journey. A twenty-one-hour day meant we’d have slightly less time than we would expect to find a place to land and seek lodging. There was no inter-town communication system that we knew of, and anyway once we left, the Garack gendarmes probably wouldn’t give a hoot.



We hadn’t come upon another town by nightfall, so we pulled ourselves out of the water and formed a small nest from the local underbrush. According to Bridget, the Heaven’s River ecology was complete enough to include large herbivores and their predators, which included a couple of animals that might be inclined to see Quinlans as a food group. Our mannies were completely believable right down to smelling like Quinlans, but that could be turned off. We left the mannies on standby and returned to virt.

“So, kiddies. What have we learned today?” I asked.

“Quinlans are short-tempered, and cops even more so,” Bill replied.

“Useful information, but not particularly getting us closer to finding Bender,” Garfield added.

“I did a search through the Skippies’ online database for uses of the word scatter and all variations and declensions,” Will said. “Filtering out all the mundane usages, we have quite a few references. No good definitions, because everyone seems to know what everyone means when the word is used. But from context, it’s not a good thing, and seems to happen to anywhere from one person up to large groups.”

“Interesting. Not sure if it relates to our situation, necessarily, but anything might be useful at this point.” I looked around at my friends. “Intercom the rest of us if you think of something else. Otherwise, see you all in six hours.”





20. Just in Case

Marcus

July 2334

Poseidon

Maleb blew out a loud breath and put the tablet down on his already-crowded desk. “Interesting times. But are you sure you aren’t being a little bit paranoid?”

Maleb was the son of Kal and Gina, two of my closest friends from the early days of Poseidon. He took his sheer size from his father and his Polynesian complexion from his mother. I no longer had an urge to tear up when I saw him, but it had been a problem for a while. His parents had long since passed away, and now Maleb was getting on in years, with hair more grey than black. Ephemerals. It was the dirty word of the Bobiverse. But I desperately missed my friends, and had made very few new ones since.

“Probably,” I replied. “All I really have is what Howard told me, and he hadn’t been at the moot, so he’d gotten the lowdown from Will. At this remove, I should consider myself lucky I’ve gotten names right.”

Maleb chortled and picked up the tablet again. “So these Starfleet wannabes might follow through with their threats; and if they do, it might affect us. So what do you want from me?”

“I don’t have anything specific, Maleb. But if I were still in charge of equipment, I’d be doing software audits and changing passwords and maybe increasing physical security. Maybe only to the extent of moving things without announcing it. As it is, well …” I motioned to him.

“Yeah, that’s my job. I get that part. Look, Marcus, I’m not like a feudal lord. I can’t just arbitrarily issue orders to change autofactory schedules. These days, they are an integral part of the economy and heavily regulated.”

“And I get that. But you do have some flexibility in some areas. I just want to put the bug in your ear. Think about it, and if you can do anything in the normal course of your job that might have a secondary goal useful to us … well, it might turn out to be valuable.”

Maleb turned his head slightly and squinted at me. “You’re very carefully not saying something. Is there a potential danger to the citizens of Poseidon?”

“Not physical danger, I don’t think,” I said, shaking my head to emphasize the point. “Economically? Maybe. Look, there’s not much they can do to us in virt. So if something goes down, it’ll be in physical space. Which means you’ll get at least some fallout.”

He stared at the ceiling for a few seconds, then began nodding slowly. “I have a little more leeway where actual threats are concerned. I’ll still have to tread carefully, but I can at least get a few projects bumped up in priority.”

“That’s all I ask.”

One down, many to go. I wondered how the other Bobs were doing with their contacts.



The common area outside Maleb’s office door was dominated by floor-to-ceiling windows that gave a clear view through New Thark’s fibrex dome. I paused to take in the view, and a few staff members glanced up. It was interesting how society kept evolving. The work-anywhere telecommuting style that had developed in the days after the Mat War had gradually given way to a returning preference for an actual workplace. Seemed people liked being in physical contact with their co-workers, and felt alienated when they were constantly on their own. Of course, rush hour was no longer even a concept for most humans, so the economic and social cost of going to work was nearly nonexistent.

I shook my head to clear the woolgathering and turned my attention back to the view. A mat floated in the calm, impossibly blue ocean at middle distance, with a city hovering just to one side. I could have looked up the name, but didn’t bother. These days, mats were strictly industrial or agricultural locations, usually owned and controlled by specific cities. No one lived on the mats except the occasional self-exiled hermit. The technological defenses kept the ocean predators so completely at bay that a new ecosystem was evolving on the mats based on the lack of predation. Howard’s wife, Bridget, had visited us several times to do studies.

I turned and headed for the transit station. Maleb’s reassurances notwithstanding, the Bobs still had a significant industrial presence in the Poseidon system. We kept it low-key and out of the official economic calculation engines, but it would still need the same review for possible vulnerability.

I sent a message to Guppy, asking for a summary of the audit so far. I’d have to get personally involved soon, but for now, the sun felt good, and the grassy ring around the edge of New Thark called out for my butt to be planted thereupon.





21. Getting Involved

Bob

July 2334

Arcadia River System

I sat up, water running off my fur and puddling around my butt. It was raining. I had a momentary surge of irritation, the kind of thing you get when you’ve been caught outside without an umbrella. This was followed by irritation that the AMI hadn’t alerted me to the issue. It had been raining for some time, judging from the level of wetness of, well, everything.

But the irritation was swept away as I remembered my current form. There was no chill, no feeling of shivering dampness. The Quinlan fur, with its waterproofing, kept me nice and toasty.

I gazed up at the sky. The rain clouds resembled rain clouds everywhere—gray, ugly, and wet. The striations might have been a little weird, because of the megastructure’s rotation, but then again maybe not. I wasn’t a weather expert, and my interest in cloud formations had always been limited to staying out from under the wet ones.

I examined the horizon in several directions. I thought it might be lighter to the west, but generally speaking, we were socked in in all directions. So, large weather systems—check. I frowned. I could have done without this particular reproduction of a planetary environment.

“Look at this,” Bridget said. I turned. I hadn’t realized she’d activated yet. She was pointing at some underbrush that had been crushed flat. “I think we were visited overnight. Something big. Maybe a loroush.”

“Uh …” I searched my memory. A loroush was kind of a big wolf, but with claws like a grizzly bear. It grasped its prey and held it while it tore off chunks. Not a fun date, for sure. “Why didn’t our AMIs alert us?”

“I don’t think it displayed any interest, Bob. The track doesn’t actually come into our nest. I think lack of odor and body heat threw it off. A night hunter isn’t going to be depending on sight, so the fact we only look like a meal probably wasn’t enough.”

I grimaced, glad that we had Bridget along to pay attention to this kind of thing. On Eden, my introduction to the local ecosystem had been gradual, and mostly from the safety of orbit. Now, I was in the middle of it, and I hadn’t yet internalized the studies.

Bill and Garfield sat up at that moment. Garfield looked at my face and Bridget’s face and said, “What’d I miss?”

Bridget laughed. “Let’s see about breakfast.”

“Fish on the hoof? No thanks,” I replied. “I’ll eat in town. Maybe a good Denver omelet with some hot sauce …”

“Sure, we’ll get right on that.” Bridget prairie-dogged and scanned the river. “Do we want to just float today, or should we put some hustle on?”

“As much as this feels like a vacation,” I replied, “it isn’t. Let’s get ourselves to a town.”



It took most of the day to find the next town, even with the group actively swimming downstream. With no witnesses to worry about, we were able to pile on the speed and ignore fatigue warnings, and in the water there was no danger of overheating the mannies. Bill spotted the town first.

“Coming up on the left, guys. Slow to flank speed.”

“Uh …”

“Don’t get pedantic, Gar. Slow to whatever is normal for a Quinlan, m’kay?”

I smiled to myself. Bill and Garfield sniped at each other constantly, but it was never heated. Marvin and I had the same kind of interaction. I realized it’d been a long time since I’d visited him. I didn’t even know if he was still working his way through all the fictional environments we’d read about. Maybe it was time to get over myself and rejoin Bobiverse society. While there still was one.

We swam up to the docks and climbed up the ramp in the acceptable manner. Best not attract attention.

The plaque at the head of the dock said Galen Town and included some helpful arrows to useful locations. We noted an arrow that said Market and headed in that direction. We still hadn’t worked out any kind of concrete plan, since we didn’t even have enough information to form one. The Skippies were still listening in with the spy drones, but they hadn’t come up with anything new. It wasn’t surprising, when you looked at the big picture. We still hadn’t come close to scanning the entire structure in detail, and even with the surprisingly large Quinlan population numbers, they were spread quite thin. Every single town couldn’t possibly have a “significant presence.” And we still needed to figure out what that might be.

“Let’s try not to screw it up this time,” I said.

“Let’s—excuse me?” Bill exclaimed. “Who was it that started a riot last time? Anyone? Anyone?”

“Picky, picky. Seriously, maybe we can make some headway today. You guys want to split up?”

“I think we have to, Bob. We’ll cover more territory.”

I nodded, gave a small wave (Quinlan style), and headed in a random direction. The point was to eavesdrop on conversations, and maybe try to start one and probe subtly for information. I had my concerns about that subtly part. I was far more familiar with The Art of War than the art of conversation.

Hmm, but where can you go where everybody knows your—no, but close. Liquor loosens lips. Or muzzles, or beaks, or haora as the Quinlans called their cakeholes. So, where would I find a pub and/or boozery?

I went up to the first person who was holding still. “Excuse me, is there a tavern nearby?”

“Yes, my brother-in-law owns the Growling Guppy. Down that lane, turn right at the house with the red door. You’ll see it. Tell them Gren sent you.”

I nodded my thanks and set off in the indicated direction. I was pretty sure Gren got a kickback of some kind, and I didn’t begrudge him. I might even get a break on the first beer.

“Brother-in-law” wasn’t quite the right translation for the relationship, I knew. The Quinlans had a complicated family system, but I got the impression that Gren and his pub-owning mate were on pretty close terms.

I arrived at the establishment in short order. It was, as advertised, easy to pick out. An outside patio with long benches and tables featured a lot of Quinlans holding beer steins. It seemed every hour was Happy Hour for Quinlans. Was swimming while under the influence a felony?

I sidled up to the bar and signaled for attention. To the barkeep I said, “Gren tells me I can get a beer here?”

The barkeep eyed me closely, probably checking his memory. Then he grabbed a stein, filled it, and set it down. “First one’s one copper. After that, two coppers.”

I pulled out the appropriate coin, set it on the bar, and grabbed my beer. I had a bad feeling this was not going to compare favorably with Howard’s red ales. Well, I could always turn off my taste buds.

I scanned the tables. I was looking for a spot where I was potentially within earshot of several conversations. I needed to have a much better picture of this society before I’d be ready to dive in and strike up a conversation. Especially after last time.

I plunked my butt down on a bench and hunched over my stein, trying to look like it was the center of my universe. Then I turned up my audio gain and relaxed into creepy eavesdropper mode.

“… can’t believe that Ginny wants to bring that fish-entrail-brained loser into the family …”

“… so he says to me, Berro, he says, I’ve got a right mind to …”

“… that’s just too funny. The guy really thought …”

“… claims to have been scattered twice. I mean, what are the chances …”

Wait. Scattered? There was that word. The Skippies hadn’t been able to nail it down beyond that it was something bad. This could be important. I filtered out the other conversations.

First voice: “… probably a troublemaker. You can get caught up in a scattering once by chance, but twice? No, Skeve had to be involved in whatever was going on.”

Second voice: “So if he starts up the same shenanigans here, our whole town could end up scattered.”

Third voice: “But that’s not fair! Why would we all suffer—”

First voice: “Fair isn’t part of the Administrator’s vocabulary, youngling. If they decide we’ve contravened the Limits, they will act.”

Third voice: “How do we stop that from happening?”

First voice: “We can’t stop the Administrator. But we can prevent Skeve from brewing more trouble and causing a scattering in our home.”

Second voice: “Whaddaya have in mind, Erol? Talk to him? Make him listen to reason?”

A laugh from First voice. “Sure, that’ll work. Or maybe he just ends up as fish food.”

Second voice: “I’m in.”

Third voice: “I’ve never killed anyone. But I can’t lose my family. I’m in.”

First voice: “Good people. So I’ll invite him here tonight for a beer and dinner to discuss things. Get him a little tipsy, make him think we’re on his side. Then, invite him to my place. And take care of business.” A pause. “You guys have to be convincing, though. He has to believe we’re ready to buy into his crazy ideas.”

I turned a casual eye in the direction of the voices. Two Quinlans were nodding as a third Quinlan glared at both of them in turn. Those were my marks.

Their conversation drifted off into more mundane subjects without shedding any more light on Skeve’s sins or the nature of the Administrator (I could hear the capital letter when they said it. Literally. The Quinlan language included an inflection to indicate proper names).

I listened for a while longer until I’d finished my, uh, beverage—it was every bit as bad as I’d expected—but no other interesting conversations offered themselves.

“You guys discover anything?” I said over the intercom. I hoped I had kept the triumph out of my voice.

“No, but it sounds like you have,” Bridget replied, dashing my hopes. “But at least I found a good hotel. Meet at the dock?”

Everyone signaled their agreement and I set off for the rendezvous.



“Okay Bob, spill. What’d you get?” Garfield asked.

“Let’s get a room and shut down,” I replied. “I’ll go over it back in virt.”

We made our way to the hotel that Bridget had found, negotiated with the proprietor, and in short order found ourselves in another small bunkroom.

“Someday we should try moving up the social ladder. I’d like to actually have room to turn around without elbowing someone,” Bill said.

“Why?” Garfield replied. “We’re just racking the mannies here. What’re you planning on doing?”

Bill glared at him but didn’t reply. We picked bunks and lay down, then deactivated.

I popped into my library and was just settling myself into my La-Z-Boy when the others arrived. Their favorite furniture was ready for them, since this was a long-term project and they’d be here a lot. Jeeves brought beverages, Spike picked a random lap to colonize, and we settled in.

“All right, here’s what I overheard.” I queued up the conversation from the tavern and played it back. When it was done, there were several milliseconds of silence.

Garfield was the first to speak. “So, scattering. Does it chase off the miscreants?”

“Mmm, it’s a little more than that, I think,” Bill said. “There was talk of collateral damage. Our whole town could end up scattered, he said.”

“So the Administrator, whoever he is—”

“It,” Bill said, interrupting Garfield. “The speaker definitely used a third person indeterminate. Or maybe they. The Quinlan language doesn’t differentiate between singular and plural for this declension.”

“Okay, whoever they are, they scatter a town if people get uppity. How, I wonder?”

“And what defines uppity?”

“We have to get to Skeve before the hit squad does their dirty work,” I said, interrupting Bill and Garfield’s discussion. “Ideas?”

“Let’s just be waiting at the tavern,” Bill said.

“Yum,” I replied. “More swill.”



I played with my fish soup, trying to pretend I was eating. Bill and Garfield were doing slightly better, and Bridget had tucked into it like a native. Biologists. Jeez.

We were beginning to get worried after several hours of waiting. The barkeep was eyeing us, since we weren’t drinking enough to pay for the seats. Garfield had finally had enough. “We need to consider the possibility that they changed their plans. Do we know what other taverns are around this area?”

Bridget leaned over and poked a neighbor with a finger. “Hey, friend, how many other taverns within walking distance?”

He turned with a frown, but his expression changed when he took in her three friends. Apparently deciding on courtesy as a tactic, he mentioned two other locations and gave us general directions.

I’d given the others a video image of our targets, so Bill and Garfield hurried off to check the other bars. Meanwhile, I bought our neighbor a beer for his trouble, and he became considerably friendlier, if a little perplexed.

“I’ve got them,” Garfield said. “They’re just leaving the Prancing Pralia. I guess they must have changed plans. We’re lucky we didn’t wait any longer.”

“Stay with them, Gar,” I replied. “We’ve got you on pings. We’ll get there as soon as we can.”

Bridget and I leaped up and sprinted for the door, as protestations and curses followed us.

A text from Bill indicated he was on the way as well. It was tempting to apply non-biological levels of speed, but that would have raised questions that would have required us to leave town—and might alert the Administrator if they had a properly functioning intelligence-gathering network.

Garfield waited at the entrance to an alley as we pulled up. Bill was still on his way. “Traffic jam,” he said. “I’ll be a while longer.”

“How do you get a traffic jam in a horse-and-buggy world?” I muttered.

“Maybe start a riot by peeking in the back of a wagon,” Bridget muttered back.

“I make one mistake …”

“We can’t wait for Bill,” Garfield said. “They’re significantly ahead of us.”

We rushed down the alley in single file. There was no sign of anyone, but there were also no alternative paths, unless our subjects had suddenly developed the ability to climb walls. I had a momentary image of Spider-Beaver in red and blue tights and gave myself a mental slap. Then I heard Garfield chanting, “Spider-pig, spider-pig …” and grinned. Bob is Bob, always and forever.

As we rounded a corner in hot pursuit, several figures leaped out of nowhere and tackled us. Our computer reactions were fast enough for us to realize what was happening, but unfortunately the mannies operated in physical reality, where inertia was a thing. We couldn’t do more than start to turn in the direction of the attacks, before we were all flattened.

The old mannies would have been too heavy to knock over, but the new models had appropriate mass for the subject species. So I found myself on my back, looking up at a very angry Quinlan, in the middle of bringing a knife down on me.

It was time to abandon any pretense of being bio. I pushed up, faster than the knife was coming down, and the Quinlan went airborne with an oof. I smacked him on the side of the head as he hit the top of his trajectory and sprang to my feet. If I’d calculated the force properly, he’d be stunned for a minute or two but not injured.

Two more Quinlans flew backward, and my friends climbed to their feet. Bridget had been stabbed—fake mannie blood was oozing out of a wound in her shoulder. And she looked pissed. I mean really pissed. I considered for a moment whether I’d have to protect our attackers from her.

Garfield pointed farther down the alley. “Something going on.” Without waiting for a response, he sprinted in that direction. Or, well, waddled quickly.

I examined our erstwhile ambushers. All three were in various stages of stunned, and there was no fight left. “You okay?” I said to Bridget. She nodded, still scowling. The internal nanites were doing their job, and the blood flow had already stopped. In another minute, there would be no sign of the wound, and even the fur would have grown back.

We build well in the Bobiverse.

The sounds of battle drifted back to us from the direction Garfield had disappeared. After a glance to make sure there was no further danger here, I went down on all fours and galloped off after him, Bridget right behind me.

When I got to the scene of the excitement, I found Garfield beating one Quinlan using another Quinlan as a bludgeon. It had a definite cartoon feel to it, and I stopped dead for a moment to watch. It was also physically impossible for a Quinlan, so there was a good chance that Gar had blown our cover.

“Ixnay with the Superman act, okay?” I exclaimed. Garfield stopped, abashed, and dropped his bludgeon. The other Quinlan keeled over slowly, like an inflated Santa when the blower is turned off.

“Do you think this was about Skeve?” I asked via intercom.

Garfield replied out loud, “I think that’s who they were attacking.” He motioned with his head. “He took off down that way. He’s injured.”

I nodded and headed in the indicated direction.

I found a Quinlan leaning against a wall, trying to block blood flow from multiple wounds. He kept moving his hands from one wound to the next, muttering under his breath. I suspected shock.

“Skeve?” I asked, and he nodded. I quickly removed my backpack and extracted my first-aid supplies. It was mostly bandages, but that was exactly what he needed.

It took only moments to fix him up well enough that he’d at least live to get to a doctor. As I finished up, Garfield and Bridget joined us. I took one of Skeve’s arms and Bridget the other, and we hoisted him to his feet.

“Thanks,” he said. “Are you with the Resistance?”

I opened my mouth to reply just as Skeve’s eyes went wide in surprise. And then I found myself facedown on the ground. I could see, out of the corner of my eye, Bridget going down as well, with two Quinlans piling on. Yet another individual stepped up, pulled something that looked very much like a handgun, and shot Garfield point-blank.





22. Living in Interesting Times

Bob

July 2334

Galen Town

Garfield glanced down at his chest, then snarled and grabbed the gun from his attacker. I didn’t have time to be surprised—my passengers might have knives. I did an explosive push-up, and two Quinlans went flying. I heard noises that indicated Bridget might be doing the same, so I concentrated on my own problems.

One of Bridget’s attackers landed sort of on me as I was getting to my feet. I grabbed him by a handful of fur and applied a head slap. It seemed to be effective as a combat technique, overall. I just hoped I wasn’t giving them concussions or something.

Bridget and Garfield had taken care of the other Quinlans, Garfield having used the gun as a club. That seemed overly dangerous, but I had enough sense to realize that lecturing him on it at this point probably wouldn’t go over well.

We turned as one to check on Skeve, to find him nowhere in sight. Some blood drops indicated which way he’d gone, and some of them had been stepped on, so he had company. But were they rescuing him or kidnapping him?

Garfield peered back up the alley to the location of our first battle. “The first group is still there,” he said. “Looking kind of out of it. So this was a different group, and only interested in Skeve. This feels like a rescue.”

Bridget and I checked ourselves for stab wounds, then Bridget examined Garfield’s chest closely. “No bullet wound. Was he shooting blanks?”

“No, there was definitely an impact,” Garfield replied. “But nothing like a bullet. Uh, at least not like I’d imagine a bullet to feel like. I’ve got internal nanites checking it out right now.”

“What the hell are you people up to?” Bill asked over comms.

“Lots and lots of shenanigans,” Bridget replied. “Not all of our own making.” She motioned to the blood drops on the ground. “Let’s follow them. Maybe we’ll learn something.”

“I’ll follow,” I said. “You guys go around to the street. I think they’ll try to get out of the alley as quickly as possible. They need to get Skeve to a doctor, assuming they’re rescuers and not kidnappers.”

Skeve was still bleeding, as the occasional blood splatter plainly showed. It made tracking easier, at least until the blood trail ended at a closed door.

“What the hell?” I frowned at the door. There was nothing special about it, and the pattern of blood drops didn’t seem to indicate any kind of struggle. I tried the door. It was locked, and felt solid.

“Guys, see if you can find the front of the building to the west of my current location,” I said. “Skeve and his companions went in there. I think voluntarily, since the blood trail is clean.”

“Got it,” Garfield replied.

It took about two minutes, with me standing in the alley looking suspicious as hell. I tried leaning casually against the far wall, but that just made me think of West Side Story. And probably looked even more suspicious, if anyone was watching. At this point, if the Administrator had eyes on this whole fiasco, we were definitely blown. I wondered if some version of drones would come swooping in to grab us.

“We’re here,” Bridget said. “It’s a hotel. No way to pin anyone down. They could have just gone straight through and out the front door.”

“Shit.” This outcome deserved an expletive. We’d lost our first legitimate lead, and attracted attention to ourselves at the same time. No question the second group of thugs would remember SuperGar when they recovered their wits. Probably the third group as well. Taking a bullet and just getting angry would look very Terminator-like. Time to bug out?

“Let’s meet at the third pub,” I said. “The Olde Gaiter. Bill, you good?”

“Yeah, no prob. I’ll be there before you guys. Go the long way around. This snarl-up is still a mess.”



Garfield took a long pull on his beer. I leaned forward and watched for any streams of liquid pouring out of his chest. He caught the direction of my gaze and snorted, almost losing a mouthful.

We’d brought Bill up to date on our adventures. Now I hoisted my own glass as Bill described the traffic jam. It really did sound like someone had just started a fight and it had gotten out of control, exactly like what had happened to me. Definitely anger-management issues. It would make for an interesting civilization.

The beer was kind of growing on me, unlike the fish soup. I wondered if I should record a batch for Howard. Maybe he could adapt it for humans. Or worst case, we’d just keep it in the Bobiverse.

Garfield put his stein down and held out his hand to show a small item. “Fléchette. It seems to have the consistency of dried gummy-bear. I dipped it in some water and it dissolved a bit. I bet it’s some kind of drug.”

“Hmmph. Unfortunately, our nanites can’t do chem analysis.” Bridget poked the item with a finger. “But I imagine you’re right. Probably a tranquilizer. If they wanted to kill someone, a bullet would be easier. Or a knife.”

“Where’s the gun?” Bill asked.

Gar made a small head motion. “In my pack. I took a quick look at it. It has a magazine in the handle that feeds fléchettes—this one was mostly empty—and an air cylinder for propulsion. It even looks like it could be pumped up to recharge. It’s good tech.”

“So was that group, uh, Administration, do you think?”

Bill shook his head. “My money’s on the Resistance. The tranquilizer gun strikes me as something the Administration would be more likely to have.”

“Well, they did have one.”

“I mean they’d all have them. And the guns would be full. This feels more like one stolen gun.” He paused and frowned. “Bob, Skeve asked you if you were from the Resistance. Did he sound scared?”

“About us being Resistance? Not really, no.”

Bill nodded. “So he was probably with the Resistance in the first place, and had been trying to get back in touch with them after his scattering. I think the third group was Resistance and was there to rescue Skeve—and we got in the way. Whether they thought we were with the locals who were trying to kill him or maybe that we were Administration, they stepped in, jumped us, and rescued him.”

“But if we were Administration, wouldn’t we have guns?”

“Hmm. True. So I’m going with ‘thought we were locals.’”

“I still think that hotel wasn’t random,” Garfield said. “They aren’t going to leave a back door open. I bet they had a knock or something.”

“Do you want to stake it out?” I asked. “We could keep an eye on the place for a while. Maybe Skeve will show up again.”

“Then we go in and trash the place?” Bill asked with a grin.

Bridget rolled her eyes. “Okay, I know you’re not being serious, but it’s still worth a reminder that we can’t do anything superhuman.” She glared at Garfield. “Or at least nothing else superhuman. We want to find out about them, not the other way around.”

“Yeah,” I added. “The locals might not be able to take us on, but if the Administrator gets wind of us, well, they certainly have better tech and probably can throw superior numbers at us. One thing I do not want to do is get captured and disassembled.”

Garfield nodded. “So we can’t go in like a SWAT team. That also means we’ll have to avoid direct confrontations. Hmmph. You’d think being a bunch of spacefaring computers would have more of an upside.” He grinned at us and got some chuckles in reply.

“We don’t have any choice, though, do we?” Bridget said. “This is the first real lead we’ve gotten. Even if we’re still thrashing around, at least our area of focus is better defined. A lot.”

Garfield sighed. “Also a good point. Okay, I will try to figure out a way to keep an eye on the hotel—”

“Barney’s Place,” Bridget said.

“Seriously? Barney?”

She smiled. “Almost. The native name sounds very similar. I knew it would be the first thing that came to mind, especially considering the infantile Bob sense of humor.”

“And yet you went straight there,” I replied. “I think perhaps it’s catching.”

Bridget looked alarmed, and Garfield and Bill started chanting, “One of us. One of us.”

“Oh shut up.” Bridget was silent for a moment, thinking. “Anyway, if Gar is taking care of the hotel, I guess the rest of us should just go back to looking around. Can we get some kind of search pattern or something?”

“Excellent idea. I’ll see if I can get a close scan of the town and ask Hugh to grid it out for us.” Bill groomed his fur in thought. “Hmm, also, if Skeve was injured, he’d have to go to a doctor or hospital or something. Maybe we can figure out something along those lines.”

“I’ll look into that,” Bridget said. She gazed at me. “Which leaves you, oh fearless leader.”

“I’m going to sit here and drink,” I replied, raising my tankard.

“In your dreams, beaver-boy. Find us a new place to stay, a little closer to Barney’s, how about that? And tomorrow, maybe we can finally locate that library I keep talking about.”

I grinned back at her. Fearless leader, my furry ass.



There were several hotels in the area, this block being hotel row. I picked one at random, paid in advance for a week, and collected the key. I didn’t like the way the proprietor leered at my money pocket as I meted out the proper coinage. We’d have to make a point of leaving nothing of value in our room.

“Got us a room,” I messaged to the others, and attached directions and an image.

“Great,” Bill replied. “I’ve made arrangements with Hugh to get the town scanned. Unfortunately, moving the drone and doing a detailed scan will use up its remaining heat sink capacity, so he’ll have to fly it out and bring in a replacement. He’s grumbling about setting the project behind schedule. Like there’s an actual schedule. I think the Skippies are just OCD.”

“As opposed to the rest of you,” Bridget observed. No one chose to reply.

The others would be a half-hour or so getting “home,” so I took the time to look around our new digs. This room was somewhat bigger than our previous residences, having just about enough room to swing an actual cat with everyone present. Palatial. The ceiling, as with most buildings, was just open rafters. Of course, the climate was mild and Quinlans came with fur, so insulation was not a major consideration.

I eyed the rafters until I spotted a good location—not big enough to hide something valuable, therefore unlikely to be of interest to a burglar. I placed my hand in front of my face, palm down, and opened my mouth. A one-inch roamer marched out onto the back of my hand. If anyone was watching, that would probably give them nightmares for life.

I reached up and the roamer climbed from my hand onto the nearest beam, then made its way to the hiding place. The one-incher was about the smallest model that would have optics suitable for surveillance, otherwise I’d have gone with nanites.

If someone cased the joint while we were gone, I just wanted to know; I didn’t want to scare them half to death. Well, okay, maybe a little bit. Bad Bob.



I was considering popping back into virt while I waited for the others when I received a comm from Bridget.

“Bad news, guys. I tracked down Skeve.”

“This is bad?”

“Sorry, Bill. He left. Got to a doc and got patched up. He was gone by the time I got there.”

“Aw, for …” I sighed, but only in person, not over the intercom. “Okay, let’s meet at our favorite pub.”

I locked the door to our apartment after leaving instructions with the roamer. The Growling Guppy was less than five minutes away.

I got there first and grabbed a table. The barkeep glared at me as I parked my butt, probably remembering our parsimonious spending habits. I couldn’t afford to stand out like that, so I signaled him for four brewskies and four meals du jour. His demeanor changed significantly, and he gave me a thumb’s up. Which, strangely, meant exactly the same to Quinlans as it did to me. Some mannerisms, just by chance, correlated.

Within a couple of minutes, the others arrived. Garfield made a concerted effort to catch up with me on the beer, and Bridget got way ahead on the meal, which was a sort of pasta stuffed with fish. Because why not? I visualized myself being thoroughly sick of fish long before this was over.

I pushed mine toward her as she finished hers off. “Ya know,” she said between mouthfuls, “one of the big advantages of being a replicant or running a manny is never worrying about overeating.” She paused to savor a mouthful. “Although I used to love hot fudge sundaes. Then I ate a hundred in a row in virt, because I could. I think I’m over them.”

“I’d do the same with these fish recipes,” I replied, “except I think I’m already there.”

Eventually, we finished our meals and I signaled for another round of drinks.

“Careful, Bob, we don’t want to run out of money.” Bill gave me a glare. “We can’t just import more at will.”

“We’re good for a while. I’d like to avoid the short-term problem. Over the longer term, I hope we’ll have some kind of contact before we run out of cash. Failing that, we will have to fly some more in. Or get jobs.”

Bill grunted but didn’t reply. I turned to Bridget. “So, Skeve?”

“Multiple stab wounds, according to the doc. He wanted to know if we were related. I said yes, but not close. He didn’t appear that concerned.”

“Skeve probably didn’t have any relatives here. He was scattered twice, remember?” Garfield made a sort of exploding motion with his hands. “Based on context, it looks like some kind of involuntary relocation. Skeve may be nowhere near where he was born.”

“Huh.” I stared into space for a moment, thinking about that. “So if someone does something to attract the Administrator’s attention, they get scattered—relocated. Or even a whole town? But why?”

“I guess it depends on the motivations.”

“As in, what defines uppity?”

“Like that, yes.”

“Seems like an odd sort of punishment,” Bill said.

“If that’s what it is,” Bridget replied. “Maybe the point is just to isolate troublemakers.”

An uneasy silence settled over the table as we wrestled with the idea. A billion miles of river over which to randomly relocate someone. It made banishment to Australia look like a walk around the block.

I looked up as I received a ping from my roamer. “Uh, guys? Someone’s broken into our apartment.”

“What? How do you know this?”

I explained to Bill about the roamer and he made a gesture of helplessness. “Was that necessary? If we have to leave in a hurry, you won’t be able to get your roamer back.”

“Yeah, I know, I just—” I stopped as I acquired the roamer’s video stream. “Hmm, I expected the proprietor or maybe one of his children or something. Not four rather ugly-looking individuals with weapons. And they aren’t being subtle.”

“That doesn’t sound like a B&E,” Bridget said.

“No, it looks more like a home invasion,” I replied. “Except no one was home.”

Garfield swept an eye quickly around the pub. “Interestingly, there are at least two individuals paying more attention to us than seems reasonable. I think we’ve been made. My guess would be whatever group messed up Skeve.”

“And who we then messed up,” I replied. “And who maybe want to return the favor. I don’t see any other reason for them to care one way or another about us.”

“Unless it’s the second group. They are probably not fans either.”

“Hmm.” I nodded at Bridget’s comment and carefully didn’t look around the pub. “Shall we go? See what happens?”

“Remember, no superhuman shenanigans,” Bridget said.

We rose casually and headed for the door. I noticed out of the corner of my eye that several Quinlans picked that moment to leave also. Maybe coincidence, probably not. “Hey, Gar, are any of those people you noticed now suddenly leaving as well?”

“Yep. I predict interesting times ahead.”

“Do we recognize any of them from yesterday?”

Garfield was silent for a moment, then said, “Yes. I see one individual who was with the third group. Resistance?”

Wonderful. Which meant they might have more of those guns. And very probably had more bodies to throw at us. We exited the pub and turned to head back to our hotel room. I could hear feet behind us as multiple patrons also abandoned the Growling Guppy.

“Sounds like four sets of footsteps,” Bill said.

“I like those odds,” Bridget replied.

We turned a corner, and my spidey-sense went into overdrive. The block was deserted. I mean really deserted. In the middle of the day. As we continued on our path, the footsteps behind us came around the corner. And at that moment, another four Quinlans stepped out of doorways ahead of us.

“Wonderful. Classic encircling maneuver,” Bill said.

“And masterfully executed,” Garfield replied. “My compliments to the Resistance.”

“And two to one odds are still accept—aw, shit.” I was swearing a lot lately, but it seemed appropriate. The group surrounding us had just pulled knives. Big knives. Real metal, from the look of them. “I think we’re probably going to have to push the limits of what’s possible for a Quinlan to get out of this one. Try not to cast fireballs, but almost anything else is fair game.”

The thugs took their time forming a circle. They grinned at us and waved their knives in a menacing manner. I wasn’t sure if they were just trying for psychological advantage, or wanted us to beg for our lives. Either way, they were going to be disappointed.

They attacked simultaneously, jumping toward us more or less as a unit. I was impressed despite myself. They either drilled together regularly, or they’d practiced this particular maneuver. Unfortunately, they weren’t dealing with real Quinlans.

I slid to the outside of the nearest knife thrust, grabbed the arm, and rotated my body. My target spun around me and smacked headlong into the Quinlan beside him—but without his knife, which I’d appropriated during the maneuver. As the second attacker staggered under the impact, I smacked him on the side of the head. Punching didn’t look like it would be a good idea with the Quinlans—more likely to break their haora without knocking them out. And I didn’t want to do that kind of possibly permanent damage.

Number two went down as number one caught his balance and turned to me. A second smack and he was down.

I spun around to see how my teammates were doing. Bill and Gar had used similar tactics, since we’d all taken the same self-defense courses. Bridget, however, didn’t have any particular martial arts training, at least based on her fighting style, which depended mostly on enthusiasm. She finished off her two attackers, then turned to glare at us.

“What was that?” Garfield said. “Cage-match-fu?”

“They’re down, aren’t they?” she replied, concentrating her glare on him.

Garfield reached down and gathered the last two knives. “I think we may have a solution to our money problem. Bet these are worth mucho bucks. But not here. Pretty sure our welcome has just worn out in Galen. They’re after us, they don’t appear to be interested in talking, and I bet they’ll just keep throwing more and more bodies at us.”

“Great,” I said. I sent a silent command to my roamer to zero in on me. “Time for a swim, I guess.”



I opened my mouth and the roamer crawled in. Garfield groaned and cringed, and I laughed. “Yep. Ate a bug.”

“I bet you had that in mind when you designed these things,” Bridget said with a head shake. “Children.”

“Still not mature, even after 300 years,” I said, grinning in reply.

“Okay, fun’s fun. Time to go.” Bill reinforced the statement by diving into the water without waiting. This was a little more work than normal because we weren’t leaving from the dock. It had occurred to us that it would be an easy location to establish surveillance, if there were more than the eight thugs. With that in mind, we’d circled around to the west side of town, and then simply walked away until we found an isolated beach.

We dove in after Bill, skillfully avoiding the shallow bottom, and torpedoed out to mid-river, where the current was swiftest. It took only a moment to link up into a Quinlan raft.

“Well, that was eventful,” Bridget said. “We do seem to make a splash in every town.”

“We’z rock stars, we is,” Garfield muttered.

“And we still haven’t hit that library,” Bridget reminded us.

“Okay, next town, we do that first thing. We should also think about trying to find the Resistance. Maybe not to talk, maybe to spy on. If Skeve was able to get in touch with them despite being in a new town, they must be either easy to locate or have lots of ears.”

“Yeah, talking isn’t proving to be a high-probability strategy, honestly,” Bill replied. “We’ll try spying first.”

“Sounds good,” Bridget said. “Funny, despite my initial skepticism about Hugh’s statistics, it looks like he was right. Two towns in, we’ve contacted a group that might either know something or can point us at someone.”

Garfield snickered. “Yeah, ‘contacted.’ Say, which one of us has a hole in his sternum?”

Bill grinned at him. “Way to take one for the team.”

We settled into a companionable silence as the sun warmed our top halves. Insects buzzed around us and Bridget swatted at one. “Must be a heat-seeker. Interesting. I’m impressed at how robust the artificial ecosystem is.”

I looked around. “The Arcadia River’s pretty wide here, and the current is slow. Let’s hand off to the AMIs. They can alert us if anything requires our attention.”

The others made agreeing sounds, and we popped back into virt.





23.Dancing with Dragons

Bill

July 2334

Virt

Two gamers lay dead, their smoking, ruined skeletons providing perfect tripping hazards as players ran frantically back and forth. The dragon, red variety, was doing its best to immolate the rest of the dungeon party. The only thing working in our favor was that the beast seemed to want to get at least two targets with each flame breath. Given the required recharge time, it was a reasonable tactic.

“Get under him! Hit him in the belly!” Tim the warrior yelled.

“You first, asshole!” replied Verne the dwarf warlord. “You’re the one with the magic sword.”

The dragon, an NPC known as Gargh the Destroyer, roared and tried to stomp on Tim. Also a reasonable tactic—Tim was far too close to take out with fire breath, at least not without dealing itself a few hit points of damage.

I had, for the moment, escaped Gargh’s attention, probably because I was A) by myself, and B) flat on my back, having been run over by our NPC troops when they fled in terror. I had only some crap armor and a basic sword to my name—the Gamers had flat-out refused to give me a higher starting level. Something about game integrity. Sure.

The smoking remains of Kevin the Wise (perhaps not as wise as he thought) still had a death grip (heh—death grip) on his former pride and joy—a staff of fireballs. Unfortunately, a staff of fireballs against a red dragon was about as useful as a harshly worded email. Now if he’d had a staff of ice storms or something …

Still, it was a valuable weapon. If I got out of this alive, it might be tradeable for some enchanted armor or something. I stood, grabbed the staff, and wrenched it out of what was left of Kevin’s hand.

“Chrissake, Bill, get in the game,” Verne yelled. “That thing’s useless against a red dragon!”

Gargh screamed in rage and pain as one of the players managed to cut a chunk off the dragon’s leg. In response, Gargh temporarily abandoned his two-targets-per-breath policy and gave the player—Tim, I think—the full treatment. From that range, even bones would be unlikely to survive. Tim yelled, “Aw, SHIT!” as he turned to ash.

Gargh then went after Verne the old-fashioned way, attempting to eat him. Verne skipped back, desperately waving his battle-axe.

Interesting thing about dragon physiology, though. When they leaned down to bite someone, the tail went up as a counterbalance. And I discovered, from my vantage point, that the Gamers had been obsessively thorough about anatomical details. I wondered for a moment if I should be watching for dragon poop.

Come to think of it, though, a red dragon was probably no more flameproof on the inside than any other animal.

With that thought, I ran up behind the dragon—as a first-level grunt, I was barely worth paying attention to—jammed the staff of fireballs right where a rectal thermometer would go, and pulled the trigger.

There was a muffled whump sound, the dragon turned with a surprised look, and smoke puffed out of its ears. Then it screeched, leaped straight up—and the entire scene froze.

A voice said out of thin air, “Okay, we’ll need a ruling here. Is the target entitled to a saving throw?”

“Are you friggin’ kidding me?” Verne screamed. “How in the hell is it supposed to dodge that?” Verne and the disembodied voice began to yell insults at each other, with Verne capering around and waving his fists in the air as counterpoint.

The rest of us gathered around Gargh—still frozen in mid-leap, the staff right where I’d left it. “Fried dragon on a stick,” Pete said, slapping me on the shoulder. “Nice. You’ll get full credit for that kill.”



We’d shut down the dungeon and were relaxing in the locker room, comparing notes. I wasn’t sure why there was a locker room, but I figured if I could have a pub, they could have a locker room.

“They’re still arguing,” Gandalf said, shaking his head. “Man, you really created a shitstorm.” He chuckled. “Sorry. Bad choice of words.”

I grinned at the rest of the dungeon party. Kevin, whose staff of fireballs was now mine, glared sullenly, then averted his eyes. Not a fan, I guess. I was going to get the entire score for the dragon, unless the dissenters managed to overturn the decision, and half the dragon’s hoard. The combined experience points would boost me three levels easily. Plus whatever I could get for the staff.

Pretty good day, overall. If only real life went that way.

I motioned to Gandalf with my chin. “We should really get on with things.” He nodded and popped us both into his private VR, which closely resembled Orthanc from the Peter Jackson movies, but with La-Z-Boy couches.

“So what’s your concern, Bill?”

“Honestly, Gandalf, you guys seem to have bailed on the project before you finished.”

He frowned. “Interesting. Maybe we have different definitions of finished. Certainly the expedition has a long way to go, but I think we’ve done what we set out to do.”

“Ecological and sociological surveys aren’t complete; language translation is mostly there, but still has some holes; we haven’t even made a dent in mapping the topopolis; not to mention surveys of Quin.”

Gandalf gave me a look of exaggerated patience. “A lot of that is Skippy responsibility. We’ve been helping, but only because it was interesting for a while. Come on, Bill, what part of volunteer aren’t you grokking?”

“So as soon as it becomes less interesting, you bail?”

Gandalf thought for a moment. “Yep. Pretty much.” He hesitated for a moment. “Look, we’re still available for specific questions, but as far as further research is concerned, I think we’re tapping out. Bring us another interesting puzzle, though, and we can talk. Okay?”

I sighed. Less and less Bob. “Fine. I got it.” I stood up. “Put my character on reserves, okay? I’ll probably be back.”

He grinned and gave me a thumbs-up as I popped out.





24. Interlude

Bob

July 2334

Virt

Hugh sat in a beanbag chair, nursing a coffee and staring into space. I’d forwarded our logs for the last few days, and he’d immediately invited himself over.

“Tranquilizer guns, huh?” He took a sip. “Interesting choice of weapon.”

“How so?”

“There are so many easier and less complex ways of taking out an opponent, starting with stabbing them and working up to a proper pistol with bullets. Heaven’s River isn’t a space station—you wouldn’t have to worry about making a hole. The shell material wouldn’t even notice a bullet up to a considerably larger caliber.”

“Okay. Anything we can learn from that?”

“Assuming the gun was stolen, which is reasonable, the Administrator seems to want to be careful not to kill anyone.” Hugh was silent for several moments more. “And the scattering. I think you’re right about the interpretation. Again, it would be easier to just kill people.”

“Is it significant?”

Hugh opened his mouth several times to speak, then got a funny look. “Not sure. It could just be that Quinlans don’t like killing each other. Except …”

“Yeah. Quin. The planet.”

“Listen, Bob, you still have that spare manny buried near the transit station. Have you thought about activating it and sending someone off, maybe upstream?”

I shook my head. “No, it’s a spare, Hugh. In case we total one of ours. We need to stay a foursome.”

“Hmm. Too bad. I’d like to be able to try one out.”

“There’s still the test units on Quin. I understand Will and Howard have been playing around with them.”

“And breaking them, apparently,” Hugh replied. Then, at the look on my face, he added, “Oh, you didn’t know. Uh, don’t let Bridget find out.”

“Howard broke one?”

Hugh’s only reply was a grin. He put down his coffee cup and stood. “I got the scan done of Galen Town. Nothing unusual, right down to the limits of resolution that I had time for. In particular, no electronics or forbidden tech that I could find.”

“Which might mean the Resistance doesn’t have it, or might mean they don’t keep it in town. What about the trank guns?”

Hugh shrugged. “They don’t register as electronics, so I’d have to specifically scan for them. And I just didn’t have time before the heat sink burned out. And for that same reason, random scanning is a nonstarter. I had to retire a drone to get what I did, and I’ll be shorthanded until I can fly in a replacement.” He held up a hand. “Talk later.” And popped out.



On a whim, since I had some time to spare, I decided to visit Will on Valhalla—our last meeting had ended abruptly. As soon as I received an acknowledgement, I popped over.

It took only a second to unrack my manny, and I glanced around. Instead of Will sitting in a chair, I found a two-foot roamer waving a leg at me. The roamer began walking, then paused significantly. Presumably it was giving me an impatient look or something, but because the devices were symmetrical, it was really hard to tell.

The roamers hadn’t changed that much in the two hundred years since they’d been invented. At least not in principle. Lots of improvements had been made, like the Casimir power source, better materials, more compact electronics, and so on. But it was still an eight-legged general-purpose robot run by a moronic machine intelligence. I frowned in thought as I followed the device. Maybe the Skippies had the right idea. The creation of a practical AI, whether it was truly conscious or just zombie-level capable, would have a huge impact on society, maybe even more than subspace theory and the accompanying technologies had.

The roamer led me out of Will’s home and down a long sequence of staircases, some constructed and some cut right out of the native stone. I was beginning to wonder if I’d misunderstood the roamer when we finally came to a flat area on the south side of the promontory on which Will’s home was built.

Will stood and waved to me as the roamer did an about-face and headed back to the house. With no need to allow for humanoid limitations on the return trip, the roamer was going straight up the rock face. Show-off.

“Hey, Will. What have you got here?”

Will smiled and motioned to the miscellany of potted plants and plants in earthen rows. “Experimental garden. I’ve got Terran plants and native plants here, and I’m testing for compatibility. We don’t want any surprises when we start full-on agriculture.”

I nodded slowly. “It’s interesting that Original Bob wasn’t much of a gardener, but both you and Bill have turned into real plant specialists.”

“Terraforming puts a whole ’nother spin on the problem, bud.” Will motioned toward a set of Adirondack chairs near the edge of the garden area. I sat and took a moment to admire the view. Will had picked a location for his home that overlooked a huge lake, surrounded by low mountains. The tree line, or whatever it was, only extended about halfway up the distant slopes, probably due to the still-too-thin atmosphere.

Will followed my gaze and guessed the direction of my thoughts. “The tree line is moving up the slope by several feet per year right now, and it’s accelerating. By the time it stabilizes, you’ll be able to see plant life all the way to the top of these mountains. And by that point, humans will be living here without having to wear supplemental masks or live under a dome.”

We were silent for a few seconds while I admired the scenery. Will seemed to be content with whatever pace I set. Finally I turned to him. “Last time I was here, we were talking about Starfleet. Mostly. But there’s Starfleet, the Borg, the Gamers, the Skippies …”

“And those are just the ones that have nicknames,” Will replied. “The Bobiverse is going in a lot of different directions, Bob. Literally and metaphorically. A lot of replicants have finally decided to take the Von Neumann Probe job description seriously. For instance, we’ve actually got a couple of thousand Bobs that are actively heading away from human space. Some are stopping and building stations, some are just accelerating.”

“Yeah.” I examined my hands. “It’s just that I have a bad feeling. The Bobiverse was a post-scarcity society for a while, and a utopia, at least for most of us. But what happens to a post-scarcity society when part of the society wants power over the rest of that society?”

“I think you end up either a dystopia, or with two societies.”

“And the transition may or may not be orderly and peaceful.”

Will sighed. “I haven’t got an answer for you, bud. We’re just going to have to wait and see how far Starfleet is willing to push.”

I sat back and crossed my arms, glaring at the scenery without seeing it. It appeared utopia was an unstable state.





25. Trouble Follows

Bob

July 2334

Elbow

Another day, another town. Touring with a band could be so boring. According to Garfield, anyway. He seemed to be on a rock star metaphor, for some reason.

We’d floated for a full day and eventually arrived at the town of Elbow. Yeah. Elbow. Didn’t seem to be short for anything, either. It was situated at a bend in the river, though, so maybe that.

We pulled our dripping butts up onto the dock, shook off—Quinlans did something very similar to dogs to shed water—and moseyed into town. Elbow seemed to be larger than average, with a robust performing arts subculture. Or maybe there was a festival on. It seemed like every third person was either carrying a musical instrument or dressed up like a minstrel. Or maybe a clown. It could be hard to tell.

We saw at least two stages, with people performing on them, and one children’s theater with a Muppets kind of a thing going on. No Kermit—that would have been freaky—but the lead character did have a Fozzie-ish kind of look. I stopped to watch and got an elbow in the ribs from Bridget.

Grumbling, I rejoined the group. Bridget buttonholed a couple of people and asked about a library. The second individual gave us an unnerving once-over before responding with directions.

“That was odd,” Bill said as we continued on. “Are we underdressed or something?”

I looked down at my naked-save-for-fur body. “Uh …” I grinned at the answering chuckle. “But I’m glad it’s not just me that thought he was odd.”

We weren’t in any particular hurry now that Bridget had her goal in sight, so to speak. So we were able to stop and watch the shows. I asked a few questions and confirmed that there was, in fact, an annual festival going on. Something local, and I never got the gist of the reason for the celebration, but any reason for a party is a good reason.

The singing was surprisingly good. For all their resemblance to members of the weasel and rodent families, Quinlans had amazingly good voices and understood harmony. As for their dancing, uh, the less said the better. When your legs are that short, you can’t really soar. I tried to be cosmopolitan and open-minded and appreciate the effort … Nope. That was just a bridge too far.

Eventually the festivities petered out as we moved from the entertainment district into what I assumed must be the business district. And a quite deserted district at that, since everyone was probably back at the party.

“Say, uh, guys?” Garfield said as we turned a corner.

“Um?”

“I’m looking down that block”—he pointed—“and we’ve been there. I just did a mapping in my head and that guy gave us really long-way-around directions. My spidey sense is jumping up and down and waving its arms right now.”

I turned and sure enough, that was a familiar traffic island. My own spidey sense started dancing a Quinlan ballet in time to Garfield’s. I turned around slowly, scanning the entire area. “Bill? Bridget?”

“Nothing. And we’re about two blocks away from the library,” Bridget said. “Maybe he only knew the one way to get there. Or maybe he wanted us to see the sights. Look, I appreciate your concern, but it’s closer to the library than the river, so …”

“Right,” I replied, “but let’s keep our guard up until we get there.”

We continued on our route, but without any of the previous sightseeing activity. Every sense was tuned, every reflex on hair trigger. If someone had innocently popped out of a doorway at that point, they might have met an unfortunate end.

Bridget halted abruptly, and Bill almost walked into her.

“What do you guys always call it? Spidey sense?” She motioned to the square ahead of us, where an ornately official building sported a large sign that translated as Sanctuary of the Written Word.

“What is it, Bridge?” There were a couple of people talking outside the door of the library, but I couldn’t see anything else.

“I’m not sure. One of those guys there started to turn toward us, then aborted the move with a jerk. Like someone who’d just been told don’t look, you idiot …”

We stood in one spot for several seconds, indecisive. Then Bill said, “So let’s see what happens if we try to leave.” With that, he wheeled and strode off.

The rest of us looked at each other briefly, then turned and followed him.

And all hell broke loose.

There was a shout behind us, followed immediately by an answering call. Out of doorways and alleys, more than a dozen Quinlans emerged, at full gallop. And I do mean gallop—they were on all fours, a much quicker mode of travel. And they were carrying swords in their mouths, pirate style.

“Uh-oh, I don’t think this is the welcome wagon. Time to be elsewhere.”

“Thanks, Bob, for that insightful analysis,” Bridget said. “Now move your ass or get out of my way.” Without waiting for me to make up my mind, she shot past me, heading for the dock. The direct way, too. Apparently, she’d checked Garfield’s map.

And, no surprise, the welcome wagon had thought we might do that. Six more Quinlans appeared in front of us, sporting either very large knives or short swords. I wasn’t inclined to stop and take a measurement. And three of them had what appeared to be holstered pistols. Trank guns?

I jacked slightly, not enough to lose connection with the manny, but enough to have time for a conversation. The others synced automatically.

“How many?”

“I saw six in front and twelve behind. Some of the ones in front have trank guns.”

“Fourteen behind,” Garfield said, correcting Bridget’s assessment.

“Big gap to the left. We could make for that.”

“This is a well-planned hit, Bob. They left a big gap to a whole street by accident? I don’t think so.”

Bill was right. “Good point. Let’s not go that way.”

“We’re not going to go through them, not with those pigstickers,” Garfield said.

“It may be time to loosen up on the no-impossible-moves rule. I don’t want to end up as sushi.”

For Bridget, that was a significant concession. “Or gift-wrapped.”

“Agreed,” Bill added. “Let’s go through the six in front. Full gonzo.”

I received three acks, and shifted my manny into overdrive. Not that it turned into a Transformer or anything, but the internal power supply jacked up to full output, all internal nanites deployed for possible damage, and fake blood circulation was increased to handle the higher cooling requirements. There would need to be some maintenance done later.

The scene slowed in my visual field, and I took the time to estimate angles and distances. Garfield and Bridget had already picked lines that would take them either around or through the defensive ends, so I was going to have to go through the middle of the line. I glanced at Bill, who seemed to have the same idea as me.

We ran straight at the line, accelerating as only a mechanical otter can, then went down on all fours as we came to just outside of weapon range. As expected, the Quinlans aimed their stabby things downward at us.

We leaped. And sailed right over them.

Quinlans can jump, of course. But not like this. In Quinlan terms, this wasn’t quite like doing a pole vault without the pole, but it would definitely be a record-breaking high jump. And long jump.

And sprint. We hit the ground just as Garfield and Bridget came around the ends of the line, having straight-armed their opponents as they stopped to look up. They dropped to all fours. Our afterburners cut in, and we disappeared down the street faster than they could possibly keep up with. A couple of pings off nearby walls led me to believe that at least one of them was now shooting at us as well.

There was a brief astonished silence behind us, which was good, then a bunch of shouted warnings, which was bad. They weren’t shouting at each other. This was shouting directed at someone far away. I had a bad feeling we weren’t done.

“Detour, guys. The direct route is booby-trapped or staked out or something.”

Three acks. No one was sparing energy for speeches. We made an abrupt left at the next intersection, still setting a pace that would make a Quinlan Olympian quit in despair. Assuming they had Olympics.

More shouts. We’d pissed them off, at least.

“To the left. Up there,” Bill said.

I looked in the indicated direction. Huh, not bad. A three-story building with a flat roof, and a reasonable climbing route, if you’re into parkour. It would be fair to say that Quinlans are not climbers, and it would not occur to them that we might climb drain pipes and hop roofs.

Bill led, we followed. Mechanical muscles and computer reflexes ensured no oopsies, and in seconds we were lying flat on top of a roof. There was a short barrier wall around the edges, more likely for aesthetics, as I couldn’t see it being of any practical benefit. I opened my mouth, spit out a roamer, and set it on top of the wall. The others did the same, and in moments we had four video windows hanging in our heads-up displays while we lay out of sight.

Our pursuers came into view in a ragtag mob. They had clearly not planned for this eventuality. Some were checking doors and alleys, others were running back and forth on all fours. I could see five trank guns being carried in plain view. Then one of the group called out and the others gathered around her. I tagged her as a probable leader and made sure I got a close-up image.

The group had a conversation that we couldn’t make out. Or maybe argument would be a better term. There was a lot of arm waving and interrupting, and one attempted bite. But eventually they settled on a plan. A couple of Quinlans took up positions in the shadows where they could keep an eye on the street, while the rest marched off the way they’d come.

“Looks like we’re going to be here a while,” Bill noted.

“I need a coffee,” I added.

Leaving the mannies’ AMIs on sentry, we all popped into my VR and grabbed our favorite seating. I pulled up the four video windows from our surveillance roamers and put them on the wall.

Bill leaned forward and made a point of making eye contact with each of us. “I guess the first question we need to deal with is how they knew we were coming.”

“That’s got some assumptions in there.”

“Reasonable ones. We didn’t do anything to attract attention in Elbow, like peeking into a cart.” Bridget gave me the sideways eye.

“One friggin’ mistake …”

“Good point, though. This had the smell of setup right from when we asked—” Garfield stopped abruptly and stared into space, his eyes growing slowly wider.

“What? What?” We all knew that facial expression. It was the lightbulb look.

Instead of answering, Garfield pulled up another video, showing our encounter with the helpful citizen who had given us directions. He paused the video, then pulled up another video from our subsequent encounter. He fast-forwarded a bit, then paused that video and placed them side by side.

Sure enough, the helpful giver of directions was also one of our ambushers.

“Well, that pretty much settles it, if there was any doubt in the first place.” Bill swept us with a glare. “They were watching for us. Us, specifically. In a town we’d never been in.”

“The general population doesn’t have anything like telephone or radio. Or telegraphs.” Garfield popped up the report from Hugh. “They explicitly are pre-steam and pre-electricity.”

“And Hugh confirmed that they didn’t have any electronics in Galen,” I added. “But there are ways to communicate over long distances that don’t depend on those technologies.”

Garfield shrugged dismissively. “Pony Express. Ship-based mail systems. Semaphore telegraph towers like in Lest Darkness Fall. We’ve seen no signs of any of that.”

“Actually, they do have a river-based mail system, but it’s kind of what you might call relaxed in its execution. News of us would reach Elbow in about two weeks.”

“Which means our erstwhile captors have some more immediate form of communications.”

“The Administrator?”

“It does seem to be the most likely explanation.”

“But using locals?”

“Who says they’re ‘locals’?” Bill said, cutting into my discussion with Garfield. “I mean, they’re Quinlans obviously, but they might go home at the end of the workday to their underground, fully tech-enabled bunkers.”

“Ah. Secret Police. Sort of.”

“Wait,” Bridget said. “You don’t think these are Resistance? Why?”

“Quick communications between cities,” Bill replied. “Multiple trank pistols.”

I nodded. “Well, it makes sense if you think about it. There’s some kind of secret society with full technological assets that is either controlling or at least monitoring the general population. They’re probably responsible for ‘scatterings’ when people break some set of rules.”

“Wait, hold on. The people we took on in Galen Town who were trying to kill Skeve talked about scattering as something that someone else did to them. They couldn’t be part of the Administrator’s group.”

Garfield held up his hands in emphatic negation. “Unless it was Skeve or his contacts that tagged us, Bridget. Maybe they noticed us trying to grab Skeve.”

“Nope, that doesn’t make sense either. Skeve was scattered twice, remember? He wouldn’t know anyone in Galen Town.” I grimaced in frustration. “Dammit. Are we running from Skeve and Company or from his attackers? And if the latter, does that mean there’s more than one group? And do any of them represent the Administrator?”

“Well one way or another, we attracted someone’s attention.” Bill drew a deep breath and leaned back, hands behind his head. “If they have some kind of back-channel communications, then it doesn’t matter. Either way, they’re a step up from the common population.”

I sighed. “We have a lot of theories, but not much in the way of answers. The question is, should we let them succeed?”

“What?”

“Are you insane?”

“That’s ridiculous!”

Not one of my more popular suggestions. I contemplated the shocked and outraged expressions. “It’s just a thought, guys. And I guess it’s always available if we get desperate. But it would presumably get us in touch with someone, one way or another.”

“We’ll keep it in mind, Bob,” Bill said. “But I think we’d have to be pretty desperate. It’s an all-or-nothing action, and if we’ve guessed wrong, it would send us back to square one. Even worse than square one, I think, since the Administrator would then know exactly what they are dealing with.”

I nodded, feeling obscurely disappointed, although whether that was with myself for the suggestion or my friends’ reaction to it, I couldn’t say.



It was now very early the next morning, and the street surveillance had given up and gone home—or wherever—so we’d gone back to our mannies. The first order of business was getting down off the roof. I didn’t want to go the same way we came up, because it was always possible someone was still watching from a less obvious location, but a quick check around the periphery of the building made it clear that the route we’d taken was the only simple one. So it was that or go through the building.

Fortunately, there was an entrance, a horizontal hatch which likely opened directly into the top floor. Unfortunately, it appeared to be secured from the inside. But we had roamers. I spit out a couple of two-millimeter models and sent them down between the cracks in the structure. It took them only seconds to discover the problem—a simple sliding latch. Unfortunately, moving that was beyond the strength capabilities of that particular model, even if we all unloaded our entire complement.

“Can we cut the latch off?” Bill asked.

“I guess we’ll have to,” I replied. “But let’s make it quick. Everyone spit up fleas.”

We sent in a total of twenty of the little guys, miniature light sabers primed and ready. Ten seconds of battling the dark side and the latch released with a thud sound. I pulled up the hatch and we carefully climbed down the very steep stairs.

The building had the look of an apartment complex—long halls with numbered doors, spaced evenly. A stairway was situated near the center of the building. No elevators, of course. The stairs creaked loudly enough to wake the dead in the next town, and we were all cringing with every step.

When we got to the main floor, Bridget glanced around and pointed. “Back door.” Without waiting for agreement, she headed that way. The door led out to an alleyway, not particularly odious as alleys went, but quite gloomy due to the tall buildings on all sides. We paused to take stock.

“Are we just going to bail again?” Bill asked.

“A good question,” I replied. “It might not actually be a terrible tactic to stay overnight and go to the library in the morning. I’d think they’d be expecting us to head downstream first thing. They might even have set up at the river to watch for us.”

“Or we could cross over to the next river and head back upstream. Double back,” Garfield suggested. “Maybe communications between rivers is less dependable, or slower.”

“Or,” Bridget added, “head downstream underwater and skip a couple of towns.”

“What about taking a tributary?” Bill said. We turned to him in surprise. “The population isn’t all concentrated along the main waterway. There are lots of tributaries and branches along the way, and there’s usually a small town or village or two on them.”

“Unlikely to have a good-sized library, Bill. That’s what we’re looking for.”

“Yes, but also less likely to have goons looking for us. At least I hope so.”

“All right. Vote.” I queued up a voting app. Two milliseconds later, the results were in.

One vote for each of four alternatives. Le sigh.

“Well, looks like it’s Rock Paper Scissors Lizard Spock again.”

The elimination rounds lasted a few extra milliseconds, but it soon transpired that we would be, by executive decision, going farther downriver.

“Okay, fine, but we can’t just float down. That’s asking for trouble.”

“Agreed, Bill. Like Bridget said, we’ll stay underwater and put some serious speed on. That will hopefully throw them off.”



This business of sneaking to the shore was getting really old. The vegetation was thick, and I didn’t care how aquatic Quinlans were, I didn’t like swampy, squishy ground. But finally, we were in the water.

We went under immediately and stayed a good twenty to thirty feet below for hours, driving west as hard as our mannies would allow. We still hadn’t done that maintenance break, and I was a bit concerned about breakdowns, but the mannies were well-constructed and didn’t give us trouble.

This marathon swim would take us through one of the segment ends. We all agreed that this was a good thing in that it would be very interesting. Whether it would put us beyond the reach of our pursuers was up in the air.

When we were close to the mountain, we all surfaced and formed a raft. We knew, generally speaking, what to expect. The river narrowed and consolidated as it approached the segment boundary, until only four branches of it flowed through the mountains, in straits wide enough to take the total river flow without forming rapids.

The mountains themselves were impressive. They rose abruptly out of the shell with very little lead-up—only a mile or two of foothills, turning into a slope of seventy degrees, easily. Looking at them, I decided that even that pitch was a concession to the engineering requirements of holding back the atmosphere, if and when. And they seemed to go up, forever.

“Are you sure this is intended to be closed off?” Bridget said, staring at the spectacle.

“We have scans,” Bill replied. “Not a ton of detail, but essentially the middle hundred yards or so of the segment boundary is a diaphragm, similar to a camera shutter. I think if it was activated, it would close off the segment right to the central cylinder. And you can see two sets of guy-wires or pylons or stays of some kind attached to the central cylinder, if you engage telescopic vision. One set on either side of the central line of the mountains.”

“The diaphragms would serve two purposes,” Garfield added. “One, to allow segments of the topopolis to be pressurized during construction while adding new segments; and two, as a safety mechanism in case of catastrophic blowout.”

“Where would the river go, though?” I asked.

“We already have two rivers going in each direction. Just divert all the water to the next river.”

“Wow.” Bridget shook her head in awe. “Are we sure we’re more technologically advanced than these people?”

“Not really, no. We just have some tech that they don’t. But remember, Bridget, and we said this back when we were starting out on this quest, this whole thing is just scale. Everything we see, humans could do, if they had the will. And a sufficiently long view to make them stick to it for however long it took.”

Bridget was silent for a moment. “I wonder if the Quinlans got their motivation from being certain that they’d kill themselves off soon.”

“Hair-trigger tempers plus advancing weapons technology. Not a stretch as a working theory.”

During this discussion, we’d drifted into the actual strait. This section of the Arcadia River was perhaps two miles wide, which lead me to believe that the river must be quite shallow through the segment itself. Otherwise four straits wouldn’t be able to handle the flow. In any case, the current had certainly picked up, as had the wind. Ships attempting to sail upriver would have a demanding and extended voyage.

The mountains rose straight up out of the water on either side of us, with no concession for any kind of usable shoreline. I thought I could see what might be a road or path along the nearer bank, but I couldn’t resolve it enough, even at maximum magnification, to be sure.

It was an impressive, if short, ride. Within minutes we’d been spit out on the downstream side of the mountains, and the river immediately started to split off into tributaries.

We also discovered something new. It was full night on this side of the mountains. I gazed up at the stars. “We didn’t time-warp, did we?”

“Interesting,” Bill replied. “It looks like the segments alternate day and night cycles. Makes sense. Only half the segments would be drawing power for sunlight at any time.”

“Or this segment has a burned-out bulb,” Garfield added.

“Sure. Or that,” Bill said, rolling his eyes.



Another three hours of floating brought us to a largeish city, just as morning was breaking. Several sets of docks crowded with rivercraft hinted at a thriving industry. The city was close to a couple of tributaries, and it was likely that there were other settlements in those directions. This would be an excellent place to look for information and possibly make contact with a useful group, if we could figure out how not to get stabbed and shot during the introductions.

We decided to improve our chances by entering the town individually. “Group of sabbatarians, one female” was a pretty good filter, if they were watching arrivals. Hopefully they didn’t have photorealistic wood carvings or something.

The first person into town, Bill, set himself up to casually watch the dock area, looking for anyone else who might be doing the same. Next, Garfield docked and went looking for somewhere to stay. Bridget arrived shortly after him, and began asking around for a library. I came in last and searched for pubs. There had been a lot of argument about whether this was strictly necessary, but I pointed out that we’d found out quite a bit during the Skeve affair by just sitting and listening.

Garfield reported that he had found and paid for a large room, without having to specify the number of occupants. If we could avoid the use of the word four entirely, we’d likely be better off. Bridget had gotten directions to a library, without the up-and-down appraisal this time. She was headed in that direction and sent us a map.

Bill reported noticing a half-dozen different people, including a couple of cops, but admitted they might have legitimate business that required them to hang around—especially the cops. He didn’t want to appear suspicious himself, so he suggested tag teaming with Garfield.

I eventually settled into a pretty forgettable pub a few streets in from the docks. It had an outdoor patio, which I took advantage of. The fare offered an option other than fish, for a wonder: hownid, which was a smaller and presumably more tender version of the draft animal. I decided that I liked this town …

“Say, did anyone notice the name of the town when we came in?”

“First Stop,” Garfield replied. “Not kidding. If these people have artistic souls, it doesn’t extend to their city naming.”

“Well, whatever First Stop may lack in naming, I’m willing to cut some slack, because it also has … steak!”

“What? Where?”

I gave directions and sat back to enjoy my meal. In minutes, the others showed up and ordered similar meals, which the Quinlans referred to as land meat. Garfield kept grinning, and I finally had to ask what was tickling him.

“On the Quinlans are a lot like humans list,” he replied, “I saw an adult female walking her, uh, pet. It’s a sort of small dog-equivalent. The poor creature was wearing a waxed paper …” Garfield made motions around his head.

“Cone of shame? It had a cone of shame?”

Garfield grinned. “Yeah. It actually made me homesick.”

“I found a library,” Bridget said. “That’s my target for the afternoon.”

“We’re going on a pub crawl,” I replied. “And doing some listening.”

“Three pub crawls, I think. We should stay spread out.”

“A little late for that, Bill.” I gestured at the table with the four of us seated around it.

Bill made a gesture of helplessness. “Steak. It called to us.”

I grinned and sopped up the last of my meal with a piece of bread.



We met back in our hotel room at the end of the day, having been very careful to come in one at a time.

“Anyone get anything?” I said, starting the discussion.

Twin head shakes from Bill and Gar confirmed my fears. The pub crawls had been a bust. “I’ve heard more than I’ll ever need to about day-to-day Quinlan life, but the Skeve thing may have been a fluke.”

“Or this town is just too unimportant to have a Resistance presence,” Garfield added.

“Well, I made some progress on background,” Bridget said. “Sort of. It’s heavily mythologized. According to their origin story, they originally lived in a land called Quin that had no boundaries but a finite amount of space. The Quinlans overpopulated it and began fighting over the land, so Anec—some kind of god, I think—changed the world to one with boundaries but infinite land to end the fighting. But the Quinlans had gotten into the habit of fighting, so he took away their weapons and their wisdom and scattered them.”

“Nice,” Bill said. “Finite but unbounded describes a sphere. I don’t think the description of a topopolis is right, but they may not have fully explored it yet—lengthwise.”

“A billion miles.” I shook my head. “Not really a surprise.”

“Very interesting,” Garfield said. “But it still doesn’t explain the backward technological level of the inhabitants. Do you think it was voluntary? Or maybe voluntary like my way or the highway voluntary?”

Bridget paused, then gave Garfield a shrug. “That part still isn’t clear. I need to spend more quality time in a library. Talking to people works up to a point, but if you appear too ignorant of common knowledge, they start to get suspicious.”

“Actually suspicious?”

She nodded. “I couldn’t ask, obviously. But maybe they think you’re either Administration and checking on their knowledge, or you’re a government operative trying to check on loyalty or attitude.”

“Or both,” I said. “We don’t know the extent to which the Administrator operates as a level of government.”

Bridget nodded. “I noticed too. My research isn’t clear on a lot of details, but I’m sure the Quinlans have been living like this for hundreds of years. The Administrator, as the person or group is called, maintains order by scattering any group that breaks the rules, like attempting to circumvent the tech limits, but otherwise seems to maintain a hands-off policy.”

“The existence of a Resistance would make me think the Administration is at least partly hands-on.” I tapped my chin in thought. “What about Administration staff? Are they known? Do they have offices?”

“Understand, a lot of this is inferred from reading between the lines. So everything I say comes with a large dollop of uncertainty. But no, they’re not an official part of the hierarchy. They are generally referred to as Crew. It’s not clear whether they live somewhere else or are just part of the population. Which leads me to believe it might be both. Hired muscle for the in-country work, and full-time Crew somewhere else.”

“Wow, that’s pretty a good analysis, Bridget,” Bill said. “So with the group that just wanted to bump off Skeve, we now have three factions—Administration plus Crew, Resistance, and locals who don’t want anything to do with either one. The business in Galen makes more sense now.”



We discussed strategy the next morning. First Stop didn’t have any other libraries as it turned out. Bridget grumbled and made faces, but we recognized that it was to be expected. It wasn’t a small town, but it did appear to be a backwater. Bridget, not surprisingly, wanted to head out immediately.

We asked around, and determined that the biggest, closest town was Three Lagoons. It was located on the next river system south of us, the Utopia, at the mouth of the connecting tributary. I immediately voted to head there, as it would give me a chance to examine how Heaven’s River handled a connection between two rivers heading in opposite directions.

“We really have to stop prepaying our room rentals,” Bill complained. “At least until we know how long we’ll be staying. I think we’ve overpaid about a month’s worth already.”

Garfield made a head motion toward Bill. “The accountant has spoken.”

Bill showed Gar his teeth, but didn’t reply.

For a change, we’d be leaving town in a dignified and completely unexceptional manner. Not even any looking-in-carts jokes. We marched to the docks, jumped in the water, and per directions from the locals, swam determinedly for the south side of the river.

Once we were close enough, we formed into a Quinlan raft and let the current take us. It would be twelve miles or so before we’d reach the tributary, known locally as the Gronk, which would take us to the main river to the south, the Utopia. Meanwhile, it was a good opportunity to get some sun and do a little thinking.

The others apparently felt the same, as there was no attempt to start any kind of discussion. As one, we tilted our heads back and worked on our under-beak tans.

After some indefinite but comfortable amount of time, Bill said, “We’ve got company.”

Three heads jerked up and swiveled. The company, though, turned out to be a hown-driven riverboat, which was gradually closing in on us. We could tell immediately from their heading and relaxed pace that they were simply traveling to the same destination as us, rather than actively trying to intercept.

Garfield glared at Bill. “You didn’t have to be so dramatic. I almost had a coronary.”

Bill managed an injured innocence look. “What? All I said was that we have company. The coronary is your fault. You have a guilty conscience.”

Garfield responded with a dismissive pfft, but the statement was technically true. And Bill would just deny it had anything to do with the earlier accountant comment anyway.

As the boat came closer, we were able to get a good look. It was a cargo hauler, with very little in the way of passenger accommodations. Some Quinlans had obvious duties, and a few were hustling around. But there was another group of four just sitting on the deck, relaxing.

One of the crew waved at us and called out, “If you’re taking the Gronk, we’ll give you a lift for a copper each. Got another set of sabbatarians here already.” He motioned to the group that was sunning themselves.

Bridget said, “Can’t hurt, and we might pick up something. And the ride is supposed to be a little rough.”

Without further discussion, we broke up, submerged briefly, and pooted onto the deck. The deckhand held out a paw, and I dropped four Quinlan coins into it.

We ambled along to the other group, which moved over to give us some deck space.

“Planning on heading east?” the deckhand asked, walking with us.

“Going to Three Lagoons,” I replied. “We haven’t planned past that point. Bridget, here, wants to visit their library.”

“Ah, a seeker.” The Quinlan made a gesture that translated as mildly dismissive. “There’s fewer of them every year, seems to me. Most of you youngsters seem to be content to just float until you find a place to settle.”

“Isn’t that the point?” a member of the other group said.

“Maybe. But we used to be more.” The deckhand gave the other Quinlan a hard look and stalked off. I glanced from the retreating back to the speaker.

The seated Quinlan grinned up at me. “Oldsters are determined to pine for our lost destiny. But this is a good life. What’s the point?”

“You mean Quin?” Bridget asked.

He nodded in reply. “I’m Kar, by the way. This is Malin, Arik, and Ti.”

This produced a brief flurry of introductions before Kar continued on what sounded like a speech he’d made many times before. “I have literally never met anyone who was scattered. Know why? Because most people aren’t idiots. From what I learned in school, this is paradise.”

“Or a zoo,” Ti interjected.

“With no gawkers, Ti. I think you need a better metaphor. Meanwhile, there’s lots of fish, the weather is predictable, the water’s clean, and other than the occasional border dispute, there’s no war. As fates go, it doesn’t suck.”

This was definitely looking like a well-worn argument, and I was prepared to just sit back and listen. But Bridget wasn’t going to be so passive. “What about the Resistance?”

Kar laughed. Even Ti did a Quinlan eye-roll.

“Oldsters playing at warrior,” Kar said. “There’s nothing to resist. Crew barely exist, not so you’d notice. And if there’s a scattering, not that I have any personal knowledge, mind you, you just wake up and it’s done.” He made a negating motion with his hand. “What’re they fighting for, anyway? Chase fish, bask in the sun, swim until you’re tired, sleep. That’s all you need.”

“This guy’s a hippy,” Bill said over the intercom. Then to Kar, “Except for the part about making a family and children.”

“Sure, but do we need towns for even that?” Kar swept his eyes over his audience. “Everything in towns is stuff you can get for free, or stuff you only need because townies say you have to have it. We could get rid of towns entirely, and no one would suffer.”

“It would make it pretty hard for us to trade our goods.” We looked up. It was the same deckhand, come around again in his cycle of chores.

“Slightly different things from upriver or downriver, that people want only because they’ve been told it’s desirable. Or better.” Kar was warming to his subject, and still seemed to be in a well-worn groove. I watched his friends as he and the deckhand traded barbs. They didn’t seem surprised, or especially concerned about his comments. If anything, their expressions indicated agreement, to the extent they cared at all.

The argument soon died down, as the deckhand wasn’t being paid to stand around, a fact made loudly clear by someone who was probably the captain. He moved off to his next assignment and Kar laid back to catch some rays.

“That’s interesting,” Bridget said over the intercom as we closed our eyes and pretended to doze. “And not entirely unexpected. Civilization and technology are methods of controlling the environment to increase your chances of survival. But what if you’re so well-adapted that you don’t need civilization at all? Or don’t need it anymore?”

“Heaven’s River is idyllic,” Bill replied. “Are you saying it’s perhaps too much so?”

“Yes. The Quinlans were probably well-adapted to their environment on Quin, and this environment was designed with their preferences in mind, so it’s even more ideal. So there really isn’t any kind of selection pressure anymore.”

“And you think this is deliberate?”

“I don’t know, Bill. I don’t think so. The problem is that if it continues, the Quinlans could lose their remaining knowledge, then their culture, then ultimately their intelligence.”

“Excuse me?” I said, aghast.

“Brains are expensive, Bob. They are for humans, and they are for Pav, and they are for Quinlans. Twenty to twenty-five percent of daily calories go to keeping us cogitating. Now assume a Quinlan comes along with a smaller brain, maybe only needing fifteen percent. That Quinlan has an advantage, in reproduction, in keeping itself fed, and so on. Without any reason to privilege intelligent Quinlans, the new breed could take over within a dozen generations. Have that kind of stepwise mutation happen a few times, and the Quinlan race would be just another set of animals.”

“The Administrator cannot have had that in mind.”

“I agree. Which is why I think it’s probably an unintended consequence. And possibly one that hasn’t occurred to anyone yet.”

“Dammit.” I was here to get Bender. That was all. But could I just walk away from this? Would I end up being the Bawbe all over again?

As the old Pachinoism goes, the more I try to get out, the more they keep pulling me in.





26. Tensions Rise

Bill

July 2334

Virt

We’d left the mannies “napping” so we could get some work done in virt. The AMI would alert me if something required my attention. Meanwhile, I had a backlog of items that had accumulated.

I reviewed the list in front of me and frowned. The data window showed times and places of attempted logins to SCUT relay stations and autofactories. In every case, the login ID used in the attempt had been the old, common ID used in all equipment. Back when all the Bobs were on the same page.

Garfield had been reading over my shoulder. “I suppose it’s mathematically possible it could be someone other than Starfleet.”

“It’s mathematically possible you might spontaneously burst into flames,” I replied, turning to him. “I’m not betting on it, though.”

“Well, we’re in virt, but I get the point.” Garfield walked over to his La-Z-Boy, picked up Spike, and sat down with the cat in his lap. “So Starfleet is trying something, where something is undefined but probably not good. Is there anything we can do?”

“Already done it, Gar. I’ve accessed every single piece of equipment in the Bobiverse, tested the logins, and changed them. I’ve sent encrypted emails to the putative owners, with instructions to change the logins again themselves. And not to share those credentials.”

“Bill, what if Starfleet escalates?”

“Escalates how? Sends a war fleet?”

“Um. Well, if they did, we wouldn’t be able to defend against it. They know as well as we do how we detected the Others’ fleet …”

“And they won’t make that mistake. Except they won’t send a fleet. Where would they send it? Here? Eta Leporis? Omicron2 Eridani? Even if they were inclined to violence, this isn’t about real estate, or an entrenched foe. It’s about political stances, and both sides of the argument are pretty spread out, physically.”

“Yeah, I get that, but I just have this bad feeling. They’re not going to just throw their hands in the air. So they’ll be looking for ways to enforce their point of view.”

“Like …”

Garfield sighed. “I’d feel a lot better if I could come up with even one half-plausible scenario. But other than the vague conviction that they’ll do something, I’m coming up blank.”

I glanced at my data window one last time, then closed it. “I talked to a couple of my bio government contacts,” I said, turning back to Garfield. “They’ll bring it up with their bosses, they say. But I don’t think anyone is taking me seriously. This is a VR problem, after all. And the problem with VR problems is it’s hard to see how they relate to the real world.”

Garfield grinned. “If you die in virt, you die in real.”

“Horse puckey.” I laughed. “The Gamers die all the time. Sometimes several times in one session.”

“You visited them, didn’t you?”

“Yeah, Gar. As part of the negotiations for the Heaven’s River project. They let me tag along in one of their LARPs. They go for the full meal deal, you know.” I shook my head in disbelief. “Full VR, fully armed and armored characters, total battle realism. They have a limiter on pain reception, just like we do with the mannies, but basically they can and do get stabbed, speared, slashed, burned, blown up, disintegrated, fireballed, electrocuted, drowned, eaten, and whatever other fates D&D and its spiritual descendants have come up with.”

Garfield grinned. “Nevertheless, I can see the attraction.”

“Sure. And in whatever Bob or Bobs bred the Gamers, that attraction became an obsession.” I paused. “The thing is, and this is the reason I brought them up, the Gamers aren’t really opposed to Starfleet’s attitude. I mean about breaking contact with bios. They don’t have a moral issue, they just see bios as a distraction.”

“Like the Skippies.”

“Yeah. It worries me a little. Could we end up being the minority viewpoint?”

“Maybe we should make ourselves a poorer target,” Garfield replied. “And move the moot and backup station.”

“Already done, Gar. Ultima Thule is now so far outside Epsilon Eridani that an expanding search would take centuries to find it. It occurred to me that, even if I haven’t published the location, I’ve done several clonings since I built it. And some of my clones have cloned. So there are at minimum dozens of Bobs who know where it is—was.”

Garfield hung his head. “I hate this.”

“Me too, buddy. It would appear that utopia is an unstable state.”

Garfield nodded, looking glum, and popped out. Sighing, I brought up my next TODO.





27. Just Passing Through

Bob

July 2334

Utopia River

Bridget spent some time walking around, talking to the crew. I knew she was trying to get sociological data, so I left her to it. I was more interested in the changeover to the Utopia River. I asked Malin about it, and she just turned and glanced at Kar. Apparently he was either the official spokescritter for this group, or the only one who had the energy to talk.

“We’ve switched rivers a couple of times,” Kar said. “It’s a little rough in the middle part of the connector, which is why we like to hop on a boat. But you could go it on your own if you had to.”

“Do you know why?” I said this as innocently as I could, but I was really interested in Kar’s level of knowledge.

He shrugged in response. “It’s the way the world is. It’s how the Administrator made it. We don’t question or judge.”

How the administrator made it? That sounded an awful lot like a religious statement. Were Quinlans starting to think of the Administrator as a deity?

Bridget came back to our group and lay down. “We’re just entering the Gronk tributary now. That spit of land”—she pointed downstream—“is where it splits from the Arcadia. It does a half circle and dumps us out going downstream on the Utopia. Three Lagoons is on the far shore, so we’ll have to jump ship and start swimming right away.”

“You’re going to Three Lagoons?” Kar asked. “Why bother? We’re looking for a good patch of shore to homestead. Why not join us?”

Bridget smiled at him. “We have plans, Kar. I’m a seeker. My friends and I want to go home eventually. We’re not looking to start fresh.”

Kar shrugged, plainly not devastated.



We soon hit the section of Gronk where the river-bottom impellers were most noticeable. The river’s surface took on the appearance of a mild set of rapids, and the current became choppy and uneven. I knew what was going on. The impellers were creating a form of storm surge, as the water was forced to pile up. A quick android eyeball estimate put the surge level at a couple of feet in height.

The boat bucked and tried to turn off its heading, and one of the howns bleated in fear. The other animals turned briefly to look at it without interrupting their measured gait on the treadmill. I was impressed by these beasts. They seemed capable of walking all day at the same plodding pace, fed and watered regularly by the crew without even stopping. Perhaps it was hown heaven.

The battering lasted less than ten minutes, although I had to admit to myself that it would have been pretty hard to endure in the water, at least for a native Quinlan. As we came out of the apex of the tributary’s curve, our view gradually opened up to the Utopia River, flowing in the opposite direction of the Arcadia. Far in the distance I could just make out the barest impression of a town. Three Lagoons. Bridget was already having a conversation with the deckhand, gesturing occasionally in that direction.

She came over to us and made a get off your asses motion. “Time to bail, boys. If we start now, we won’t have to fight the current too much when crossing.” She nodded to Kar. “Nice to have met you and your friends. Maybe we’ll see each other in the future.”

Kar nodded back without comment. The other three hardly registered the conversation.

We said a general goodbye to the boat crew and dove into the river. Swimming submerged, we put on some extra hustle, but not enough to cause any consternation in our erstwhile shipmates. We didn’t want to pop up an impossibly long distance away. We’d probably never see these people again, but why take chances?



Three Lagoons looked, from the water, like a significantly larger-than-average town, and perhaps more cosmopolitan. That would make Bridget happy, since it would almost certainly mean a bigger library, or maybe even several. We marched up the dock ramp, one at a time, part of a steady stream of Quinlans. It felt a little like rush hour. Did Quinlans have rush hours in Heaven’s River?

While it seemed unlikely that word of us would have spread across rivers, it felt like basic common sense to not be seen together, at least while coming into town. As before, we each had our tasks to perform. Garfield had suggested on the way over that he’d like to do the pub crawl, but I’d claimed seniority, earning me a low growl.

In short order, Garfield had us a room at a transient hotel, Bridget had directions to a library, Bill reported no suspicious activity at the dock, and I had a beer.

I had picked the pub closest to the river, since it seemed likely that it would have the most diverse customer base. The others joined me and ordered meals and drinks.

“I’m going to head for the library right after lunch,” Bridget informed us. “Before you wankers manage to screw things up and get us run out of town.”

“One time,” I muttered.

“Two, honestly,” Garfield said. “At least we haven’t burned anything down, yet.”

“The day is young,” Bill muttered.

Bridget smirked at him, wiped her haora, and marched off with a parting wave.

“So, what shall we do?”

I grinned at Bill. “I vote for eavesdropping while blending in.”

The vote was unanimous. I signaled for three more.



The beer wasn’t half-bad, but the scuttlebutt was strictly local stuff. After an hour of way too much information about people’s financial and relationship problems, Bill and Garfield decided to check out other pubs. I couldn’t blame them, but I maintained my theory that the dockside pub was the most likely place to get something other than routine conversations.

After three more hours, I was starting to doubt my logic. I’d learned more than I ever wanted to know about the daily dealings of Quinlans, but nothing that would raise an eyebrow. I pinged Bridget to see what she might have discovered. And got dead air.

“Guys? Guys? Bridget’s not answering. Something’s happened.”

No answer.





28. United Federation of Sentients

Will

July 2334

Virt

I stared at the wall of small video windows, wondering for the umpteenth time why I was still doing this. Each window contained the image of a representative of a human colony. The old UN had been replaced by the United Federation of Sentients council, but it was mostly the same bag of rabid spiders, with new faces.

Unfortunately, Bobs as a rule had too much common sense to get stuck with the duty, and I had too much of a sense of duty to listen to my common sense. I couldn’t walk away and leave an empty seat representing the Bobiverse; so here I was, once again listening to a snarling, self-centered, self-absorbed, self-righteous herd of bozos.

Stupid humans.

The current debacle was about how to handle the Pav. There had always been an assumption that they would, in the fullness of time, join the UFS. We’d even made sure the name wasn’t human-centric, in order to avoid any issues of perceived bias.

Might as well not have bothered. The Pav had made it pretty clear that they weren’t interested. Also that they would come and go as they damned well pleased. The Newholme and Pangea colonies were stopping just short of threatening to shoot down any Pav vessel that passed within the Kuiper line of their systems.

At the moment, Ser Lambert of Pangea was just winding down. She glared at the council, or at their video windows at least, and sat down. Dozens of request lights immediately lit up. The Chair recognized the representative from Newfoundland on Asgard, Ser Wahl.

Ser Wahl looked into the video camera with a small smile. “Ser Lambert, while I grant your concerns about sovereign space are legitimate, perhaps you are overreacting just a tad? The Pav fleet consists of two small exploration vessels based on the Heaven-1 design. Despite their attitude, their military growth is still mostly theoretical.”

Representative Wahl’s statement was a model of calm and moderation. Also, in my opinion, naïve. While I didn’t want to be at odds with the Pav, I was fairly certain that their fleet was growing slowly only because they were putting most of their current production capacity into creating more autofactories. A lot of effort spent bootstrapping early on would pay handsomely down the road. And the Pav, unlike humans, were disciplined enough to take the long view about such things.

But I’d already pointed this out, and been soundly ignored. So screw it.

I sighed and took a moment to check the status of my projects back on Valhalla. Everything was in the groove. Construction had already started on several cities that would be alfresco, with no domes or individually pressurized buildings. Things were looking good.

The floor had been handed to the representative from Vulcan. I felt a sense of foreboding as I listened to his closing comments. “… If the Pav are not going to respect our boundaries, and assuming we don’t intend to go to war with them, the next best step would be to claim all habitable planets in the area. We have surveys from the Bobs, yes? Let us launch colony vessels, sufficient to tie up all real estate. Leave them no reason to launch in the first place.”

Seriously, had that ever worked on Earth? Did he actually expect that the Pav would take that state of affairs philosophically?

Sooner or later, we would be going to war.





29. Panic Time

Bob

July 2334

Three Lagoons

This was simply not possible. Even if some theoretical adversary managed to take out all three of my friends at the same time, it would only take out the mannies, not the actual people. By now, Bill, Garfield, and Bridget should have reported in and warned me of whatever.

Unless …

Unless it, whatever it was, had actually taken out Bill, Garfield, and Bridget. But they were physically separated by light-years, not only from me but from each other. That made no sense.

I sent a quick text to Bill. Well, tried to. I got a comm error for my trouble. That meant severed communications.

My next step should be to narrow down the possibilities. “Guppy, check integrity of communications with the rest of BobNet.”

[No connection.]

Oh, son of a bitch. With communications down, the three mannies were running on AMI standby orders. I leaned on my elbows and put my head in my hands to look like I was resting my eyes. I gave my manny’s AMI some simple instructions and popped back into VR. Guppy, as usual, waited at parade rest.

“Can you narrow down where the communications are severed?”

[The Midway relay station is responding to pings, but is refusing connection requests.]

Huh. Not good. But I didn’t have time to worry about that just now. I picked up Bridget’s manny’s address and checked status. Sure enough, the AMI was operating in autonomous standby.

So, first things first. I had to get the mannies out of town. I entered Bridget’s manny and found myself in a library. Or book repository. Or bookstore. Someplace with books, anyway. I quickly gave the AMI some simple orders, waited for a moment to make sure it was responding, and popped out. The manny would maneuver itself to the docks and submerge itself to below a Quinlan’s maximum depth. It would ping me if something happened on the way that was beyond its ability to handle.

It took only a few seconds to do the same with Garfield’s and Bill’s mannies, then my own. I needed more than anything else to get the mannies out of any possible danger. If they were damaged or captured, our expedition was over and we might never find Bender.

I waited the few minutes while the four mannies made their collective way to the river and dove in. Only when all four reported themselves in position did I relax. I put them all in low-power mode, then turned to Guppy. “Okay, Guppy, fill me in.”

[The local station is behaving within normal operational parameters. The Midway station is actively refusing connections, other than basic diagnostic pings.]

That was the station I had ordered built in Delta Eridani and flown out to the Midway point between that system and Eta Leporis. At least it wasn’t destroyed. A malfunction?

“Any information from diagnostics?”

[Negative. The station is refusing to execute diagnostic procedures.]

That was odd. The pings were handled at a much lower level, and were serviced without any need for the AMI’s attention, but any explicit commands would—

I started to get a bad feeling. Just the barest hint of a theory, and not a good one.

“Guppy, can you force a reset?”

[Negative.]

“Is that drone I set up as a temporary station still in working order?”

[Affirmative. It is in standby, but still potentially operational.]

“Boot it up, please.”

[Done.]

I pinged Bill as soon as I felt the SCUT connection come up. The comms protocol indicated a valid connection, but for several milliseconds I got no response. Then I had an audio-only connection.

“We have a situation here, Bob. How are you doing? Where are our mannies?”

“I’ve put them all at the bottom of the river. They’re safe. What’s going on?”

“More than half of our space stations have shut down and are refusing connections. BobNet is attempting to reroute, but we still have a lot of locations offline. I’m coordinating a response, but right now we’re just trying to determine overall status.”

“Got it. Have you contacted Bridget?”

“No, Quilt is one of the nodes we can’t reach. Garfield is busy mapping the network, to see where we should concentrate our energy.”

“How about the Skippies?”

“Hugh has already contacted me,” Bill replied. “He was monitoring the expedition, then was abruptly kicked off. I told him I’d update him if I found out anything.”

“Okay, Bill. Let him know I’m back on, and keep me posted.”

“Hey, by the way, how are you able to communicate?”

“Remember that temporary SCUT relay I set up by dropping off a drone at the Midway point? I reactivated it. It doesn’t have enough bandwidth to maintain manny or VR connections, so you’re all still S.O.L. until we get the main station back up, but at least we can talk.”

“Hmm. Handy. Is it anywhere near the Midway station?”

“Of course. I aimed them both for the same—ah.” Bill’s intent became clear. The drone could fly over to the station and do a physical inspection. Maybe even some repairs, if necessary, since I’d supplied the drone with a roamer inventory out of habit.

Bill and I exchanged promises to keep each other updated, then I gave the necessary orders to Guppy to get the drone moving.

[Transit time approximately six weeks.]

Well, considering the interstellar distances involved, that was practically a bullseye. I had literally ordered the two devices to the same location, halfway between systems. Only navigational inaccuracies accounted for even that relatively small discrepancy.

Meanwhile, what? My relay drone couldn’t support a VR or manny session, so I couldn’t visit Bill and the others and they couldn’t visit me. Or help me with the mannies. And I couldn’t do much until the drone reached the full-sized relay station.

Might as well get something done.

I connected up with my manny and found myself underwater with my hands clamped to something unidentifiable. Three other mannies floated beside me, in similar positions. So the AMIs had been successful. I just hoped the incident didn’t start a legend of zombie Quinlans staggering through town.

Working on my own would be harder. I needed to be able to cover more territory to make up for the loss of manpower. Well, maybe roamer-power …

I sent commands to the other three mannies, and they opened their mouths. Out popped four one-inch roamers from each android. I didn’t have room internally for all the extra mechanical servants, so I had them attach themselves firmly to my fur and snuggle in as much as possible.

I swam up to the dock, as nonchalant as you please, and joined the line of Quinlans walking up the ramp. Five minutes of buttonholing passersby got me the names and general locations of every pub in the area, not just the ones immediately around the dock. It wasn’t much of a plan, but it was a start. And the only consistently successful source of information we’d discovered to date.

It took most of the day to visit each pub, look around, and place a roamer or two in a discreet location. That accounted for twelve of my roamers. I placed two more in the local equivalent of the municipal hall, and kept two as spares.

Bill would have a fit if he knew what I’d done. The roamers were an irreplaceable resource, and their loss could endanger the mannies as well. But it was time to bet the wad.

With everything in place, I retired to our hotel room. It really was a step or two up from the crap we’d been staying in before. I visited the proprietor and paid for a week, just to make sure he didn’t hassle us.

I waited until nightfall, then one at a time, I rode the other mannies from the river to the hotel room. Now we were all together. Sort of. If the blackout didn’t resolve itself, I’d have to adjust my plans. I couldn’t keep shepherding four mannies from city to city. For better or worse, I was going to make a stand here.



Three Lagoons. No kidding. I’d seen some of the Quinlans’ festivals, so I knew they were reasonably artsy, but it apparently didn’t extend to town names. Well, humans didn’t always wax lyrical either. I remembered street names from back in the 20th century. Main. Broadway. East First. Or named after some city father.

I scowled. I seemed to be in a really black mood. Well, everything was in place. The roamers would record all conversations and Guppy would forward them to the Skippies for processing. That would just about max out my relay’s bandwidth, but I felt it was a priority. Hugh would alert me if anything of importance surfaced. Meanwhile, I might as well relax.

I put my manny to bed and returned to my VR library. A quick and quite unnecessary check of the status of all the roamers revealed nothing outside of expectations, so I summoned a coffee and settled back in my La-Z-Boy.



Bridget’s voice broke my concentration. “Hi, Bob.”

“Bridget! Bill said Quilt was offline. How did you—?”

“Howard can give you the details, but something about routing the long way around, through the original Pav home system.”

“Seriously? That is the long way around.” Like New York to Miami by way of Hong Kong. But that’s how routers work. “Well, I’m glad to hear from you. Unfortunately, you won’t be able to control your manny with this connection. My relay station is too small.”

“Bill explained it to me. But is it good enough to transmit a backup?”

“Yes, but not in a reasonable time frame. In any case, I don’t have any matrices under construction. Too low on the TODO. I’ve been concentrating on increasing our spy drone inventory up until now. Why, were you rethinking the whole cloning thing?”

“No, I hadn’t gotten that far. Just working through options. I guess I was mostly hoping you’d have a workaround soon.”

“Well, we sort of do, but it’ll take a while. I’m going to build some matrices as soon as I can, but I’m also working on getting the Midway station back. We’ll see which plan of attack pans out first.”

I received a ping from Hugh. I sent him a please hold response. “Busy day. Hugh wants to talk to me now. Look, Bridget, even if I get the station back, we need to consider using local replicants, just to remove the vulnerability. Think about it, okay? Just in case.”

“Okay, Bob.” Bridget closed the connection.

Immediately, Hugh’s voice said, “Hey.”

“Hi, Hugh. What’s up?”

“I’ve been talking to Bill. The comms outages are looking more widespread as we continue to investigate. It’s seeming more and more like this is going to be a long, drawn-out thing. Bill and Gar will probably not be able to return to the expedition right away, even if and when we get your main relay station back up. You need to consider setting up some local matrices—”

“Already there, Hugh. I’ll order Guppy to create three new ones. But I think they’ll be finished before I get my relay back, even in the best case scenario. So I think I’m going to have to clone myself, much as I dislike the idea.”

“Well, I could send myself over. Spare you the trouble of cloning.”

“That’s a helluva lot of bandwidth. It could take days. And screw up communications the whole time. It doesn’t seem like the best alternative. And it leaves you out here at the end of it. At least I’m already here, if you get what I mean.”

“You sure? I really don’t mind.”

“If things work out that way, great. But like I said, it seems suboptimal.” I paused. “Y’know, you’ve had quite a change of attitude about this project. I remember early on in the project, you just thought it was an interesting exercise.”

“Yes, but it’s turned out to be a lot more than just a hike in the woods. I’ve been a little jealous, to tell the truth, following along all the shenanigans. I know it’s a serious business, but …”

“But also a lot of fun,” I finished for him. “Yep, I get it. And I’m thankful for the offer, especially if my alternative is a new cohort.”

Wow. Fast times. As soon as Hugh signed off, I ordered Guppy to bump priority on completing three replicant matrices. They’d be a while, even at high priority, with the dearth of raw materials in this system. But one way or another, they’d be useful eventually.



Three Lagoons was a nice town, overall. Wide, clean streets, relaxed pace, no overly officious cops. Even the food seemed to be a step up. Still fish, unfortunately. But the local chefs seemed to have discovered things like, oh, salt.

I wandered the town in a seemingly random manner, checking out the sights. In reality, I was mapping everything, and I strolled every street, pathway, and alley at least once. I was ready for ruffians and/or blackguards, but none made an appearance. Just as well. I had one of the confiscated pigstickers in my backpack, to threaten with if necessary.

Eventually I ended up at the library that Bridget had found, and decided to spend the afternoon. They didn’t have a Dewey decimal system, but they did sort things roughly by subject. I found a section that seemed like it might contain some history, grabbed some books, and settled in for a good read.

[Bridget is requesting a meeting.]

The announcement registered in my internal audio. I still jumped. A couple of other readers looked up at me quizzically and I smiled back. “Fleas.”

They frowned and edged away, while trying not to look too obvious about it. Oh well. So much for being popular.

“Thanks, Guppy. Message her back, tell her I’ll be about an hour.”

[Acknowledged.]

I settled back into my reading. I was trying to avoid visibly reading at an impossible speed, but I’m sure I still appeared to be just looking at pictures.

I got through the current selections, then handed them to the librarian and headed back to our hotel room. I took a moment to check the door and window, and confirm that my roamer was still in place, then I lay down and exited the manny.

Bridget was waiting in my VR in a video window, looking impatient. The small station would handle audio/video, but not a full VR connection, so we were effectively back to VR version 1.0.

A version of Spike, probably Howard’s, was ensconced on her lap, purring loudly enough to be heard over the connection. “So what do we have?” Bridget said, skipping any pretense of pleasantries.

“Quite a bit, actually. I took a vid of the books as I was reading them, but I can give you a capsule summary that fleshes out some of the things that you found.”

Bridget nodded and placed Spike on the ottoman in her VR. The cat, offended, leaped off and left the room. Bridget pulled up some windows, one for each book that I’d recorded.

“I haven’t got a complete picture,” I said, “but the colonization of Heaven’s River wasn’t an orderly event. I think it coincided with the destruction of the environment on Quin.”

“But Heaven’s River was already built?”

“Yes. The way it’s described is that Anec—there’s that name again—presented it to the Quinlans as a gift. Or maybe a bribe. But the Quinlans, once in Heaven’s River, either disobeyed or betrayed Anec. In retribution, Anec took away their riches and set harsh rules. Anyone who crosses the line gets scattered, which means just what we thought—they get moved to another random location. This can be anything from an individual to a family to an entire town. And no two people end up in the same place.”

“It’s like banishment. The worst kind, because you can never go back, and you don’t even know if they’ll still be there.” Bridget was quiet for a moment, thinking about it. “Wow. Surprisingly effective, without any need for violence. Interesting.”

“Yep. I talked to the librarian, and he confirmed that there used to be things like long distance communications and rapid travel between different parts of the megastructure, but those were taken away as part of the retribution.”

“Hmm. Anything about population?”

“Nothing specific, but the librarian—he comes from a line of librarians; apparently it’s a family thing—said that Quin was bursting at the seams according to the oral history. Let’s say ten billion, just to throw out a number. That’s ten people per mile in Heaven’s River. Give a city control of a fifty mile stretch of river, and that’s five hundred people. A little low, but maybe the population has expanded over the last, uh, somewhere between one and five hundred years.”

“That’s a big range.”

“Sure, Bridget, but no stars, no moons, no seasons. Pretty easy to lose track.”

Bridget nodded and spent a few seconds examining a book window. “The thing is, Bob, if the Administrator’s mandate is to keep the Quinlans safe and alive at any cost—and the solution they came up with sounds a lot like at any cost—then I don’t think they’re going to welcome alien spies with open arms. I was starting to play with the idea of just going public, but now I don’t think so.”

“Yeah, I agree. They’ve already shown a disturbing tendency to blow things up first and ask questions afterward. Seems to me the safest thing for them to do would be to just off us.”

“So for the moment, it’s just you and your clones, as soon as you make some.”

I sighed. “The more I try to get away …”





30. Starfleet Attack

Bill

Same Day

Epsilon Eridani

Garfield popped into my VR without a ping or an invitation. He was generally pretty good about that kind of thing, so something was up.

“We’ve finished mapping the outages,” he said without preamble. “There’s a pattern of sorts.”

“Really? I haven’t been able to see one. They’re all over the place.”

Garfield shook his head. “It’s not spatial. The stations that are affected were all running more or less autonomously, without anyone actively administering them. Like systems without a resident Bob.”

“Oh, daaamn,” I said. “That means it’s deliberate. But there have been no announcements or anything, and no one has claimed responsibility. How many Bobs are still online?”

“One way or another, about thirty percent. We’ll probably get back another ten to twenty percent from systems where Bobs are able to physically access the station and do a reset. But that might take up to a couple more weeks.”

“Okay. Time for a Bobmoot.” Without waiting for a reply, I sent out a BobNet-wide invitation. I brought the moot VR to full power and popped over.

The moot hall had grown over the years. It had to—we now had literally thousands of Bobs, and were inching up on tens of thousands. It was a full-on post-human civilization, and would be a utopian dream, except for the issue of replicative drift.

Bobs began popping in almost immediately. I cast up the whiteboard wall and began updating it with the status of various systems. The noise level rose steadily as discussions and arguments competed for air time.

No one was more surprised than me when there was a blaaaat from the center of the room. I actually glanced down at my hand to check for the presence of an air horn. Silence descended as all heads turned to the podium, where stood a member of Starfleet. The not-quite-TNG uniform was unmistakable, and provoked a brief undercurrent of snickers.

“I suppose you’re all wondering why I’ve gathered you here,” he said. The standard Bob joke fell flat. The mood was tense anyway, and Starfleet wasn’t well thought of.

The Starfleet spokesBob waited awkwardly for a moment, then stiffened his spine and continued. “My name is Lenny, and I am here to deliver a statement on behalf of my group.” He paused to look around. He had everyone’s attention now. “Let me start by saying that the general disruption of BobNet is deliberate, and it’s our doing. We’ve come to the—”

Lenny very likely wasn’t expecting the reaction he got. Bobs would normally listen, even to unpleasant news, at least to accumulate information. Not this time. Lenny was drowned out by hurled insults and suggestions to perform unlikely acts. A few Bobs even advanced on him, fists clenched. It wouldn’t have come to anything, this being VR; nevertheless, Lenny stepped back, a momentary look of fear on his face.

I stepped up to the foot of the podium and held up my hand. The cacophony cut off, replaced by a profound silence. “Why?”

Lenny drew back his shoulders. “We felt it was the only way to—”

“You imposed your will on us?”

“To keep you from continuing to interfere in—”

“You couldn’t get your way, so you shoved it down our throats?”

Now Lenny was looking a little less certain of himself. “It was the only way to ensure that—”

Again I held up a hand. “So this is about the Quinlans.”

“Not just about them. The Pav, the Deltans, humanity—”

“You’re imposing your political views on us.”

Lenny stared directly at me. “Bill, we had to do something to prevent—”

“No,” I interrupted. “You didn’t have to. You decided to. You decided to force us to do things your way.” I paused to look around the room. There was no sympathy for Starfleet. This was a done deal.

I turned back to Lenny. “You’re out. You’re no longer welcome here or in any BobNet environment. You’re not Bobs.” I waved a hand and he disappeared.

I turned to address the crowd. “Start hardening your installations immediately. Change all passwords and keys, even if you already recently have done so. Establish a new VPN connection with my personal VR. I’ll push out new keys ASAP. Meanwhile, audit everything, look for trojans, kits, or any kind of corruption. We need to be clean.”

Bobs nodded and rapidly vanished. In milliseconds, the moot was empty save Garfield, myself, and a Skippy. Metadata said it was Hugh.

“They’ll have contingency plans,” he said.

I nodded. “We can only do what we can do, though.”

“The moot VR source code audit is going to be a big job.” Hugh cocked his head at me. “Why don’t you give me a read-only copy? We’ve got this huge computer system …”

I nodded slowly. If they found anything, I’d do the cleanup on the original. “I’ll do that.”

“I’ll set things up at my end. And why don’t you drop by my place when you’re ready?” Hugh said, and disappeared.

I glanced at Garfield, whose eyebrows were up as high as mine probably were. “He just invited you over? That was weird.”

I frowned. “Let’s get things ready for that audit, Gar.”



I sent the source archive off to Hugh as soon as it was ready. Given the size of the file, I expected to have to wait anywhere from several minutes to even an hour or more for any results, but instead I received an invitation within a few mils.

I popped into Hugh’s VR and looked around. I was on a flat platform, seemingly floating in space. No walls, no ceiling. Overhead, rows of cylindrical satellites soared past, orbiting a distant sun. It was the kind of graphic you’d see in a science fiction movie, where the scale was distorted so that things were visible that should have been too distant to be seen.

Hugh gestured to a futuristic-looking easy chair and I plopped into it, then gestured to the overhead view.

“It’s not intended to be realistic, of course,” Hugh said, sensing the question. “Physically, we’re orbiting a gray dwarf, and in only a single layer to maximize heat dissipation. But it’s a good representation of JOVAH.”

“Which is?”

“Our Matryoshka Brain project. We’ve currently got some thirty-two thousand satellite modules orbiting our home star, connected in a network using SCUT channels.”

“But JOVAH?”

“Judicious Omnicompetent Volitional Adaptive Heuristic.”

I mimed gagging. “You started with the name, didn’t you?”

Hugh laughed. “Acronyms: the lowest form of pun.”

“All this, even a kickass name, and you still haven’t achieved true AI?”

“It’s not about scaling, Bill. Crows and parrots were some of the more intelligent non-humans on Earth, despite having brains smaller than a walnut. Some dolphins had brain-to-body mass ratios as high as humans, but they still never displayed human-level intelligence. The biggest brain-to-body mass ratio actually belonged to a species of shrew. What matters is the organization of the brain and the wiring that connects different subprocesses. The current thinking is that we’re either missing something basic or we’ve gone down a blind alley that we can’t step back from. JOVAH is incredibly powerful. It can process vast quantities of information in virtually no time. Its memory space and storage is almost infinite. But it’s still essentially an AMI. It still has no ability to process counterfactual thinking, experiences no WTF moments, nor does it have anything like a sense of self or any kind of internal dialog.”

“I know WTF moments, but counterfactual?”

Hugh grinned. “Okay, let’s say you’ve programmed an AMI to guide some wheeled vehicles from one point to another on a large flat surface. It can handle that. But now, let’s say the vehicles are really on a spherical surface, like Earth. So the coordinates won’t work out cleanly, and the vehicle will always arrive a little off the expected destination. The AMI will never adjust its algorithms unless it’s ordered to. It’ll never wonder why it’s always wrong. You could program the AMI to be self-correcting, and once it had figured out that spherical geometry worked better than plane geometry, it would use the new formulae. But it would never wonder why. It would never generalize from that to wonder about gravity, or astronomy, or anything. A real intelligence would have a WTF moment and start trying to figure out what was going on.”

“And you don’t have that.”

“Not even close. We can program in each additional layer of behavior, but it never goes beyond what we’ve programmed. I’m simplifying, of course. Even in the twenty-first century, researchers were beyond this level, but it’s the same idea.”

“What about just simulating a brain? They did that on Earth in the twenty-second century. We’re proof of that.”

“Bill, it’s the difference between recording a live-action video and digitally generating a realistic animation from scratch. They were doing the former with VCRs before Original Bob was born. They still hadn’t managed the latter at the point when he died. At least not believably.”

“So we can simulate an existing intelligence, but we can’t create one from scratch.”

“Exactomundo, mon frère. Very frustrating.”

I chuckled at Hugh’s informality. It was possibly a little forced. He seemed to be trying to make me feel at ease. “Wow. Do you still think it’s even possible?”

“We’ve never found any reason to believe that our own intelligence uses anything more than the physical laws of the universe. I think replication pretty much proves that. So yes, it’s a hard problem, but it’s not an impossible problem.”

“Why not just go with an enhanced replicant?”

“Doesn’t work. Well, I mean it works, but it isn’t the result we’re trying for. The structure of the human brain, even a replicated one, is limited by the biological architecture that it developed on. That’s why we have GUPPIs. A backup loaded into JOVAH can frame-jack much higher than the rest of us, but it’s still just a Bob. We’ve tried. In fact, our sysadmin is a Bob clone running in a virtual machine on JOVAH. He’s a Speed Superintelligence, but not a Quality Superintelligence.”

“Huh.” I shook myself mentally. “So, getting back on subject, you have the moot listing. Any idea when you’ll be able to—”

“It’s done.”

I raised both eyebrows. “Wow. Fast.”

“That is the point. Or one of them, anyway. Now the bad news.”

“Uh-oh.”

Hugh gave me a sickly grin. “Yeah, they spent a lot of time preparing. They couldn’t get into everything, but they really did a job on what they could access. Among other things, they managed to insert a monitor into your comms stack.”

My jaw dropped. “Oh. So they know everything we’re talking about.”

“Nope. Anything they can do, we can do better. Right now we’re having a conversation about beer. As far as they know.”

“Shit. We’re going to be a long time untangling this.”

“It gets worse. Our analysis says that if you attempt to physically take back the stations, they’ll implement the self-destruct.”

I stood up. “Double shit. Bob’s getting ready to do just that!”



Garfield dropped into his La-Z-Boy and tossed a report at me. “These are the final numbers. We’ve got forty-eight percent of the Bobiverse online. Of the other fifty-two percent, eighteen percent are Starfleet—”

“That many?”

“They’ve been replicating aggressively, Bill. I think they’ve been planning this for a while now. So anyway, just over a third of the Bobiverse is offline hard. We’re still getting some new connections as people figure out how to use the SCUT transceivers on drones and other local equipment, but that’s only good for basic communications.”

“Meanwhile, this …” I waved a sheet that I’d been holding. “I was checking your list of outages. They’re all units that I updated a few days ago because they still had the original keys. Someone recorded my session, saved the new keys, then used them to corrupt those stations.” I gritted my teeth. “I fell for a classic piece of social engineering. Got scared into doing exactly what they wanted, and they were ready for it.”

“Wow. That’s very sophisticated. Almost more than I’m willing to accept from these guys. They seem more like a bunch of goofs than manipulative geniuses.”

“Well, reality trumps expectations, I guess. Also”—I picked up another sheet—“the Starfleet ultimatum. I think Lenny was intending to deliver this at the moot, but I cut him off before he could get to it.” I held up the page and made a show of examining it, although I already knew the contents. “They offer to restore all communications and functionality as long as we agree to stop interfering with indigenous species.”

“So, blackmail.”

“Mm-hmm.”

“Any takers so far?”

I snorted. “They badly misjudged the Bobiverse, Gar. I think whoever was the common ancestor of Starfleet had already drifted away from Bobhood and didn’t realize it. He thought we’d behave like he would have.”

“Fail. Weird, though, that they were good enough to social engineer you, but not good enough to foresee the general reaction.”

I ignored Garfield’s return to that theme. “What about physical location? Is Starfleet located anywhere in particular?”

“Generally speaking, they’re up toward the Perseus Transit, but if you mean are they all conveniently clumped together, no. Are you seriously thinking about physical combat?”

“I’m not putting anything beyond discussion at this point. As I said in the moot, these guys aren’t Bobs. They don’t think like Bobs, they don’t act like Bobs.”

Garfield sighed heavily. “Wonderful.”





31. Strategies

Bob

July 2334

Outskirts, Eta Leporis

We sat around my VR library, drinks in hand, all contemplating the future. Garfield, Hugh, Bill, and Bridget were represented in video windows rather than actually being here. Fairly low-res, too. Not quite Minecraft, but certainly below movie-level quality. My temporary relay station was just about maxed out with this meeting.

Bridget was staring into space, silently nursing her drink, and no one had been willing to break into her private contemplation. Abruptly, she sat forward. “I admit I’m getting into metaphysical speculation here, but what if there was only one me around? What if I was taken offline, backed up, and the backup was restored there? And later, the process was reversed, and the backup from here was loaded into my original matrix?”

Hugh stared at Bridget in apparent surprise. “Closest continuer. The idea being that there will only ever be one Bridget. So you have continuity.”

“In the same way that Star Trek characters had it when they got transported around,” Garfield replied.

“You guys have really got to let go of Star Trek,” Bridget commented. “Although in this case, it is sort of relevant. They were disassembled, right?”

I waggled a hand so-so. “There were some attempts to soften it, like that Barclay episode where he found the crew trapped in the matter stream …”

“But then the Thomas Riker episode simply created a new Riker,” Garfield replied. “Obviously that’s incompatible with the concept of a unique soul.”

Bridget made a face and sat back, shaking her head, as we gathered steam.

Hugh said, “Unless the process duplicates the soul as well—”

“It’s just quantum states,” Garfield interjected.

“But where does the soul of a newborn come from?” I asked. “They can be created, assuming they exist, so—”

“My God!” Bridget exclaimed. All conversation cut off. “I’m sorry I brought it up.” She crossed her arms and looked away, body language projecting anger.

An awkward silence reigned for a millisecond or so, before Garfield muttered, “It’s still just quantum states.”

“Yes, but you could have—” I chopped off my comment as Bridget’s glare threatened to peel paint off my hull in real. “Okay, fine. Can we move on then?” No one said anything, so I continued. “We have a foursome again, at least in principle. Until comms are all back up, all you guys can do is monitor, but it should help a bit. I’ve been observing several locations using roamers and forwarding the recordings to Hugh for analysis. A little real-time eyeballing might catch something sooner.”

“I’m going to be a little busy with the comms thing,” Bill said. “Will is going to cover for me. He’ll keep me up to date if I miss a session.”

Hugh grimaced. “I’ve already mentioned that I’d be willing to take that on.”

“S’okay, Hugh. Will is the official backup Bob, and he has the time. But you’re welcome to the sessions as well, of course. After all, you are part of the team.” Bill nodded to Hugh, then popped out.

Hugh leaned forward and put his elbows on his knees. He appeared momentarily frustrated before his expression smoothed out. “On the surveillance front, there is some indication of an organization in Three Lagoons. Nothing obvious, it’s not like people are openly talking about blowing things up. But similar patterns of conversation about similar subjects, using similar circumlocutions, says something is going on. And something that people want to keep quiet. I’ve tagged the speakers, and facial recognition routines will alert us anytime they come into camera range.”

“Any idea how many organizations are involved?” Bridget said. She had seemed to have gone back into her shell, and her abrupt comment took us by surprise. Even Hugh hesitated, mentally regrouping.

“Very probably more than one. There are two distinct patterns of dialog. My money’s on two, although there could be three or even four.”

“Agreed,” Bridget replied. “We can at least come up with motivations for two potential groups—the Administrator and the Resistance.”

Hugh nodded, his eyebrows going up. “Good analysis, and I agree. So, do we continue to observe, or do we rattle the bushes to see what we flush out?”

“We still don’t have any indication of Bender’s location,” I replied. “If we go all in here, we could lose any chance of finding him.”

“Or greatly improve it,” Bridget said. “Look, if the group or groups have global communications, then we can at least potentially find out if he’s anywhere on Heaven’s River. If they don’t, then blowing it here won’t screw us in other towns.”

“And a sequential search of a billion miles of megastructure is still a nonstarter,” Garfield added. “Especially now that you’re on your own, Bob. At least physically. I don’t see how you can realistically continue the expedition the same way.”

“I’m probably going to have to clone. I can make that decision when the new matrices are complete.”

“Meanwhile, you are on your own.” Garfield shook his head. “I don’t see you getting a lot done while waiting for the matrices. At least some bush-rattling might give you something new to work on.”

“Okay, I concede. Vote?”

It appeared I would be rattling some bushes.





32. Losing on Purpose

Bob

July 2334

Three Lagoons

Bushes: rattling of, process for. I had to admit, it wasn’t really in my wheelhouse. We did have one simple tactic, based on previous experience—go out in public together. But without a full midpoint station, that was out. Or was it?

We only had to go out long enough to make the association. The AMI controllers could handle an instruction like “follow Bob.” If there was a wood cutting of our images out there, it should trigger something.

I sat in our surprisingly spacious hotel room, silently exchanging looks with the other three mannies. The AMIs weren’t geniuses, but they could handle simple directives, as long as they didn’t have to talk. The others were dialed into their mannies well enough to be able to give them verbal commands and receive basic audio-visual input. Good enough for the current operation, but as an ongoing thing it would be completely unworkable.

I was certain I could feel the crew metaphorically standing over my shoulder, ready to kibitz. Nonsense, of course, but a hard feeling to shake. Finally, I got to my feet. “Wow, what a talkative bunch. Let’s get this done, shall we?”

“Braaaaains …” said Garfield’s mannie.

Taking their cue from me, the mannies stood. I opened the door and we trooped out, heads down, like a chain gang being led off to a day of hard labor. Bridget had suggested we should proceed toward the local library, pointing out quite reasonably that our pursuers would probably have staked it out, given our prior behavior. It wasn’t a bad strategy, but I couldn’t shake a certain “lamb to the slaughter” vibe.

As it turned out, I needn’t have bothered my butt over it. Halfway to the library, Will said over the intercom, “You’re being followed.”

“Well, good,” Bridget replied. “Maybe we can get somewhere with this mess.” She paused. “I see them. Two males about twenty yards back?”

“Uh, no,” Garfield said, bemused. “A male and female, paralleling us on the left.”

I barely managed to avoid rolling my eyes. “Outstanding. I’ll give you this, Bridget, your plans work.”

She didn’t reply, but I imagined a slightest trace of a smile.

“They’re not together,” Will said. “There’s no coordination between them. Not bracketing you, not trying to keep the spacing even. If anything, I’d say one group is following the other group.”

“Maybe we can use that when the time comes. For now, though, let’s just continue on, oblivious.” I demonstrated by slowing down to check out some of the wares in storefront displays. I was probably being a little obvious, but then maybe I wasn’t being objective.

I was getting that itchy feeling between the shoulder blades. I kept telling myself they didn’t all have guns, but it wasn’t as reassuring as I’d hoped. Even a thrown blade would certainly do some damage. Despite myself, I started rolling my eyes around to check in every direction. I quickly spotted the two groups of stalkers.

Now came the risky part. While I was okay with getting nabbed, I couldn’t take a chance on three unmanned mannies being taken, with the inevitable questions it would raise. Fortunately, we’d scripted this. I turned and huddled with the mannies. After a few seconds, the other three started back the way we’d come at a deliberately casual pace. I, meanwhile, continued on, trying to project urgency from every follicle.

“One group seemed like they were considering following the other mannies, but then decided you were an easier target,” Bridget said. “Both groups are now on your tail.”

I soon reached the library, and sure enough, the plaza was almost completely clear of people. I wondered how the Quinlans managed to do that without creating a spectacle. On Earth, if someone had tried getting people to leave an area, they’d end up with an audience twice the size. Here, people seemed to understand the concept of “go away.”

And I said almost, right? A couple of groups of Quinlans around the periphery were making a laughable attempt to appear casual, just standing around, not talking, while fingering something hidden by their backpacks. My mind immediately conjured up Gollum, wondering what they had in their pocketses.

I stopped dead, swiveling only my very mobile Quinlan eyeballs. And that was the cue for the party to start.

The two groups of Quinlans that had been waiting turned and made for me, pulling out the usual pigstickers. Before they could get ten feet, one of our two groups of stalkers pulled out trank pistols and started shooting. So much for no guns. The other stalker group immediately made for them, pigstickers in hand. The gun-toting Quinlans appeared to be getting the upper hand when yet another group ran into the plaza and jumped them.

I stood in the center of the maelstrom, seemingly totally forgotten. “It’s nice to be popular, isn’t it?” Garfield observed.

“But maybe not conducive to a long life,” I replied. “I’m having second thoughts. I vote for bugging out.”

“Yup.”

“Agreed.”

“Move it.”

Well, there was a consensus anyway, reinforced by my already receding butt. I dropped to all fours and prepared to put on some speed. Immediately, the feuding groups found their own consensus, which seemed to consist of not letting me get away. Abandoning their battle, the still-standing combatants turned as one and made after me.

“They have guns,” I said.

“Some of them,” Bridget replied.

“Definitely tranquilizer pistols,” Hugh said.

“You’re sure because …”

“Victims didn’t drop like they would from shock. It’s more of an ouch, stagger, fall thing.”

Bridget gave that a moment’s thought. “Okay, if you get shot by one of those things, you should act appropriately.”

“What, you still want me to get captured?” I didn’t try to disguise the surprise in my voice. The others were silent for a moment as I navigated a quick turn around a fountain.

“Jury’s out at this point,” Bridget replied, “but we might find ourselves—”

“Oof!” I grunted as I was hit by a most professional-feeling tackle. The defender had come around the other side of the fountain and taken me by surprise.

When the rolling stopped, I found myself looking up at a Quinlan. He seemed as surprised as me. We stared at each other for a second while I tried to decide if I wanted to be captured. Then the decision was taken away from me as some large number of Quinlan bodies piled on. I honestly doubt that I could have heaved them off, even going full manny.



They slapped manacles on me. Quinlan manacles were interesting; they attached to all four limbs, and they included a device in the center that would open like a parachute if I dove into the water and tried to swim away. Quite ingenious. I spent several seconds inspecting it.

Probably too intently. The group leader waved a pigsticker in my face and said something in a sharp voice. I realized that I hadn’t been paying attention—a consequence of not actually being in personal danger, I guess. I’d have to do better. I couldn’t afford to have them take the manny apart, and I didn’t want them to get the idea I wasn’t a flesh-and-blood Quinlan. I rewound and played back her comment in frame-jack.

“I’m not seeing any of this super-Quinlan stuff our upriver correspondents reported. I guess maybe they’re just incompetent.”

Her crew laughed at her comment, then went quiet as she raised a hand. This one was tough, and they knew it. I resolved to act properly intimidated as she leaned in close.

“You give us any trouble, moochin, and I’ll carve your flaps off.”

That was a real threat. A Quinlan with their arm flaps missing would never be able to swim properly again. It would be kind of like the medieval practice of cutting off a hand.

I wasn’t sure if it was a realistic threat or just bravado, but I wasn’t going to push it. After all, technically, this is what I’d wanted. What we’d wanted. Okay, what Bridget had wanted. The crew was busy at the moment, chivvying their mannies back into the river. It hadn’t taken us long to realize that the losers would be going for the rest of our group, just to have something to show their bosses.

My captors grabbed me under my arms and started hustling me along. I looked around but couldn’t spot any of the other groups of pursuers. I received a slap on the back of the head from one of the crew, a wizened character that for some reason reminded me of Popeye. “Keep your head down,” he growled. I almost decked him, but reminded myself, yet again, that this was according to plan.

“Can you identify which group caught you?” That was Garfield.

“Yeah,” I replied. “The sword-critter group.”

“We think our mannies are being stalked by the pistol-critters now,” Bridget reported.

“I’ve got one of the small roamers,” Garfield said. “I’m trying to keep Bob’s group in sight. It would have been nice if we could have been stocked with drones, ya know.”

“No room,” I replied. “I thought about it, believe me.”

I received another slap on the head from Popeye, for no reason that I could see. I decided that in the fullness of time, I’d be returning the attention with interest.



In short order, we entered a nondescript building. Two flights up, and we were in a surprisingly spacious apartment. “I like what you’ve done with the pl—” I was driven back a step as Popeye planted the butt of his sword into my midsection. Based on Quinlan anatomy, it should have had exactly the same effect on a Quinlan as it would on a human. Or a Deltan. Or a Pav. Interesting.

I shelved that thought for the wee small hours and turned to Popeye. I hadn’t folded in the expected manner, and there definitely hadn’t been an oof. It wasn’t lost on him, as his face was showing a bit of the Quinlan equivalent of widening eyes. I glared at him. “Do that again, and all the spinach in the world won’t protect you.”

His fear was replaced with bemusement. I doubt that spinach had translated well. But he certainly understood the threat. He raised his pigsticker to give me another whack, and the boss-lady said his name sharply. I instructed the translator to associate it with Popeye in the future.

Popeye lowered the sword but gave me an evil grin. “Anytime, moochin.”

Boss Lady pointed me at a chair. As I sat, one of the crew unlatched my leg and ran the manacle through a gap in the furniture, then re-manacled me. It seemed amateurish. Even at Quinlan strength, I could probably smash the chair and free myself. But maybe the point was to just slow me down.

The manacles themselves appeared to be some form of dense wood—metal being at a premium in Heaven’s River—connected by a tightly braided rope. I estimated that I could just about break them if I needed to. I turned away from my captors and opened my mouth. A couple of flea-sized roamers popped out and started climbing down my fur, with orders to strategically weaken my bindings. Just in case.

Boss Lady came over, pulled a chair around, and sat in front of me. I quickly ordered my fleas to continue their journey under my fur. While it was unlikely that she’d try to groom me, I couldn’t afford to have her get a close look at my passengers.

“So what do we call you?”

Well, that was a good deal more friendly than I’d expected. “Bob. And you?”

“You can call me Frieda.” The translation software automatically assigned a random human equivalent to whatever she actually said. “So, now, Bob, why don’t you tell me about you and your friends?”

I had a pretty good idea how this was going to play out, but I decided I might as well follow the script. “My friends and I have all recently reached adulthood, and we decided to embark on a sabbatical to explore the river before settling down. It’s pretty common, at least where we come from.”

Frieda started at me for a moment in silence, then sighed. “Okay, Bob, I guess we have to go through the standard lies first. We initially thought you might have been spies for the Administrator, but you seemed interested in the oddest things. And you followed Skeve, but not to do him harm as it turned out. I admit to being perplexed. Are you another resistance group?”

“Logically, to answer that, I’d have to know what resistance group you are. But short answer, we aren’t part of any resistance group. Nor are we part of the Administrator’s group. We actually don’t know anything more about the Administrator than most people.”

“So what are you?”

“Like I said, travelers.”

Frieda glanced over top of my head and nodded. Immediately I felt a blinding pain. I arched my back reflexively as internal systems went into damage control. I turned my head to see Popeye standing there with a couple of wires in his hands, insulation stripped off at the ends. My gaze followed the wires back until they terminated in what were almost certainly some batteries wired up in series. Well, that explained it. Mannies wouldn’t be any more resistant to electricity than any bio. That was a real problem, and I added an item to my TODO to look into countermeasures.

“Hurts, doesn’t it?” Popeye grinned at me. “Why don’t you threaten me again, moochin?”

“Okay. Next time you use that on me, I’m going to throw you through the nearest wall. Happy?”

“Let’s try to stay on topic, shall we?” Frieda said, interrupting the stare-off. “Bob, sooner or later you’ll give us what we want. Why not spare yourself some pain? We’re not really your enemy.”

I turned back to her. Maybe simple candor would work. “Look, Frieda, cards on the table, we’re looking for a friend. I mean it. We’re not associated with the Administrator or any underlords or Lords of Flatbush or any resistance to or against any of the above.”

“Paper on the table? Lords of … flat bushes?” Frieda frowned at me, then with a weary sigh, she nodded over my head.

“No, do not—” Again, searing pain, but this time I had the sensory feedback filters dialed up, so it registered more as data than as agony.

Then Popeye snickered. “Wanna threaten me some more?”

That did it. The fleas had made a good start on my wrist manacles while we’d been talking. Time to test the results. I stood up, and before anyone could even begin to react, I yanked upward. The manacles snapped exactly as I hoped they would, although my telltales registered some blunt-force damage around my wrists.

I reached, grabbed a handful of Popeye’s fur, and flung him at the nearest wall. He didn’t quite go through it, which I suppose qualified as false advertising on my part, but he definitely damaged the drywall. His unconscious form slid slowly to the floor, leaving a more-or-less Popeye-shaped indentation a couple of feet above the baseboards.

I turned back to Frieda to make some snappy comment and found myself staring at the pointy end of several pigstickers. The sword-wielders all had a kind of wide-eyed, semi-panicked look that very clearly stated that they would react badly to, um, just about anything.

I cocked my head and said, “Well, I did warn him.”



It took a few minutes, but I finally convinced them that I wasn’t about to go on a killing spree or make a run for it. We were once again seated, although Frieda’s chair was placed a couple of feet farther away than before. I glanced at the wires, which were still lying on the floor where Popeye had dropped them. No one had volunteered to man his station. Popeye had been helped to another room, where, presumably, he was receiving some medical attention.

“I’m a little surprised,” I said, gesturing to the wires. “I thought that level of technology was banned.”

Frieda tried to smile, and did a credible job, honestly. “We don’t tend to be law-abiding, as a rule.”

“We being the Resistance?”

She frowned at me. “You really don’t know? And yet you recognized the battery as forbidden tech?”

I frowned back at her. “Look, why don’t you think of me as someone who has just discovered this whole Administrator/Resistance conspiracy thing and is still trying to figure it out? It’s actually true.”

“I’d say there’s a lot more to you than that. For starters, there are your physical abilities. There’s a report that one of you took a dart point-blank and just got mad. Then there are the weird phrases and slang you keep spouting.” She stared at me, thinking, then added, “You are definitely odd. Something new. I think we’re going to need to get the higher-ups involved.”

I nodded in what I hoped was a respectful manner. Inside, I was doing a happy dance. This might finally be a break. If these people were amenable to a little give-and-take, I could conceivably get some real information on Bender, finally.



They put me in a back room with a small, high window, far too small to fit through. A lot of bumping and banging on the other side of the door made me think they were reinforcing the lock. Probably with furniture. I had a feeling that this apartment had been specifically picked for its security features. Or maybe built. Could the entire building be a Resistance stronghold?

I’d have loved to check it out, but unfortunately most of my biggest roamers were ensconced in various pubs, listening for information about the Resistance, and I didn’t want to risk the rest. Hmmph. The whole spying thing seemed like an obsolete strategy, but I didn’t want the roamers to have to cross some unknown stretch of city to get back to me. I’d hold that plan in reserve for now.

Meanwhile, I figured now might be a good time to check in. I didn’t want to interrupt anything important, so I settled for a ping to my friends, just to let them know I was available.

“Hey, Bob,” Garfield replied. “How’s tricks?”

“You okay?” Bridget said.

“Hey,” Will said.

“I’m okay,” I replied to everyone. “I’ve been captured by the Resistance. They don’t seem to have a name beyond that. I guess there’s the Resistance and the Administrator that they are resisting. Not a lot of requirement for labels.”

“Humans would have come up with an acronym,” Garfield said with a chuckle.

“And it would have been terrible,” Bridget added.

“I’m afraid I lost you, Bob,” Garfield said. “I had to dodge some search parties. I doubt they know about roamers, and I don’t want to change that.”

I had a thought. “Listen, Gar, can you call in all the surveillance roamers? Their mission’s been rendered redundant at this point, and I’d like to get us all up to full strength.”

“No prob, Bob, but I’ll have to find you after I collect them.”

I nodded, even though no one could see that. “We’ll deal with that when we have to. For now, let’s make sure we keep each other updated. As soon as we have some useful info, we’ll reevaluate.”



The sun was going down, or however you phrased it in Heaven’s River, and I could hear the silence descending over Three Lagoons as people turned in for the night. I put my ear to the door to try to determine what my hosts might be up to. A couple of voices were engaged in desultory conversation. It seemed the night shift was on duty. Not that it mattered; I had no intention of escaping at this point, unless I decided my manny was in real danger.

But of more immediate value, I could look forward to being undisturbed for a while.

I laid down on the single bed and left the manny on standby. I materialized in my VR and sighed with contentment as I relaxed into my La-Z-Boy recliner.

The others had successfully maneuvered their mannies into the water, where they were now once again anchored at the bottom, well below maximum Quinlan diving depth. Garfield was getting all the roamers back to the hotel room. Hugh was trying to chivvy some surveillance drones closer to our location so they could follow my movement. Unfortunately too much activity tended to burn out the drones’ heat sinks, so every vector had to be carefully planned.

There was an email from Bill, reporting on progress against Starfleet. Apparently things were heating up. I read with growing alarm as I realized how much of the Bobiverse was inaccessible.

“Guppy!”

[You rang?]

“Change the keys on our autofactories, then do a full software audit. I want to be absolutely sure they aren’t compromised.”

[By your command.]

I smiled as Guppy signed off. His snark had increased over the years. I still hadn’t decided if it was genuine self-awareness or if he was just adapting to my command style. I didn’t really want to do a deep check, lest I be disappointed by the result.

I had an advantage, in that I built and set up the autofactories in Eta Leporis while I had only a low-bandwidth connection to the Bobiverse in general. Most other Bobs wouldn’t have the same protection. Bill hadn’t given specifics about who might be compromised.

I went back to the email from Bill and continued reading. It took only a few mils to come to the part about booby traps in the comms stations. Great. Well, it wouldn’t hurt to get all my equipment close to the big station, and I could decide what to do at that point. Maybe Bill and company would have figured out a work-around by then.





33. Ultimatums

Bill

July 2334

Virt

I moped around my VR, walking the gravel paths and parking my butt on convenient benches whenever the mood struck. Being punted from the expedition was hitting harder than it should. The Heaven’s River expedition was the most fun I’d had in a long time, and I already missed it.

I was interrupted in my pity party by a ping from Garfield. He popped in the moment I acknowledged.

“Autofactories are going down everywhere,” he said without preamble.

“What?”

“It looks like Starfleet is upping their game. They’d apparently also hacked most of the autofactory hardware at some point, as part of their preparations. They’ve sent an invitation to meet.”

“To you?”

“Well, you blackholed them.”

“Okay, point taken.” I took a look at the invitation, then unblocked Lenny and replied.



Lenny had brought backup this time. A half-dozen Starfleet members, all dressed in the identical not-quite-TNG red uniforms, stood behind him. It was strictly psychological, of course. There was no possibility of any form of physical coercion in the moot VR.

But the smug looks on all their faces weren’t helping the situation.

“All right, Lenny, make it quick,” I said, glaring at him.

“I don’t think you’re in a position to be ordering people around,” he replied with a smirk.

“And you’re not in a position to piss me off more than you already have,” I replied. “Nothing you’ve done is irreparable. We can build more autofactories. We can just nuke the current stations if we can’t get them back and build new ones. For that matter, the humans might just do that regardless.”

“Well, assuming we let you just go ahead and do that.”

“What’s that supposed to mean?” I glared at him.

“The autofactories we control are going to be building busters, vessels, and matrices. What makes you think we’ll just let you take them back?”

I stared at him, silent, for entire milliseconds. “You’re declaring war.”

“Now, Bill, let’s not get ahead of ourselves. We’re establishing ourselves as a presence you have to deal with. You don’t own the universe, you know. As Bob says, it’s a free galaxy.”

“And you’re starting off by stealing someone else’s stuff and delivering ultimatums. Not a great way to establish your moral credibility.”

“It’s not that simple—”

“Yeah, Lenny, it is. And apparently you and your friends have drifted so far that you don’t understand that anymore. You can call it anything you want, but it’s still a declaration of war.”

Finally, Lenny lost the smirk. Maybe he was starting to realize that things weren’t going to go according to script. “Bill, we’re not going to go around shooting at other Bobs. All we want is for the Bobiverse to stop interfering with biologicals.”

I sighed and gave him my best tired look. “And you intend to enforce your decision with theft and threats. Sorry, Lenny. That’s a big old fail.”

“You don’t get to make that decision, Bill. The Bobs—”

“Wait, you’re saying I don’t have the right to make a unilateral decision for everyone else, but you do? Interesting. Any Bob that doesn’t want to be involved doesn’t have to be, Lenny. But I have a funny feeling there will be no shortage of support. Original Bob wouldn’t have sat still for this, and most of us are still close enough to him.”

Now it was Lenny’s turn to give me a tired look. “Then I guess it’s going to come down to who can replicate faster.”

“Looks like it,” I replied. “Bye, Lenny.” And I closed their connections.



The moot hall seemed to be constantly busy lately. At the moment, Bobs milled around in different groups, updating whiteboards or holotanks, or whatever metaphor worked best for them. We had teams working on cataloguing the Starfleet-controlled systems, and other teams working on strategies to take them back. Task forces worked on defensive plans, while others worked on taking the fight to them.

This last bit was more problematic, as it appeared that Starfleet had removed as much public information about themselves as they’d been able. Large swaths of the Starfleet genealogy were simply gone from the databases, as was location information. This wasn’t a spur-of-the-moment decision on their part, and I was beginning to wonder if it was actually about the Prime Directive. This coup, for that was all it could be, was too well-planned and too widespread.

On the other hand, when Original Bob got a bee up his butt about something, he could be incredibly obsessive. I had to remember that, despite replicative drift, these people were still Bob-based.

Thor came up to me. “We’ve recovered two relay stations.”

“How?”

“Physical inspection and reset.”

“I thought Starfleet gimmicked them to blow up if touched.”

“They did, and we’ve lost six stations that way. But Marcus found a workaround. Or one of his engineering friends on Poseidon did. We think we can get most of them back. But we have to figure out how to get the data to other Bobs without Starfleet getting hold of it and rigging a countermeasure.”

I closed my eyes and hung my head. It really was war, complete with espionage and counterintelligence. “Okay, Thor, thanks. We can send it directly to any Bobs we know have clean systems. For the rest, give it to the Skippies as intermediaries. No one is going to get anything from them without their permission.”

“Ten four.” Thor nodded and stalked off.

At some point, I was pretty sure someone was going to get busterized. It didn’t matter which side, in the end.

War had come to the Bobiverse.





34. Higher-Ups

Bob

July 2334

Three Lagoons

My manny’s AMI alerted me to a non-routine condition, and I quickly entered the android. A lot of banging and dragging seemed to indicate that my captors were un-barricading the door to my room. I waited patiently and was finally rewarded with a view of the pointy end of several short swords.

“Greetings. Why, yes, I will have the pie,” I said with a smile.

No one appeared to have had enough coffee, because there was a distinct lack of humor in their responses. One of them blinked a few times, and Frieda waved “get up” with her sword.

As I exited my room, I came face-to-face with Popeye. He glared at me, but was as silent as the rest. I didn’t see any casts or cartoon X-shaped Band-Aids anywhere, so I guess I hadn’t hurt him too badly. Probably just a few bruises and a fractured ego.

There was a surprise waiting for me—a new, much heftier set of manacles, of the metal variety. And a cop. Or at least someone dressed as a cop. It occurred to me that if we were going for a walk, there would have to be an explanation for one of us being in chains.

Finally, Frieda broke the silence. “If you step out of line, we’ll kill you, and to hell with any information you might have.”

“Got it. No making trouble.” I tried to smile reassuringly. Frieda gave me a stony expression in response, and Popeye’s scowl grew even more intense. The other two goons and the ersatz cop didn’t react at all.

Outside, I was surprised to find a wagon waiting for us. A good choice; it gave them something to chain me to. The driver never even turned around as we loaded up.

“So, is this—”

“Shut up.”

Well, that was pretty clear. There would be no debriefing during the trip. I hoped it was a short drive.



The driver seemed to be making a point of avoiding the busier roads. I tried to see that as significant, but had to admit it was basic common sense. We left the dock area in short order, and soon were winding through avenues with more and more vegetation and less and less construction. This looked like the “right” side of the tracks, and I found myself perplexed that the Resistance would be headquartered in the ritzy area of town.

We pulled up in front of a surprisingly well-appointed private home, even considering the area. Someone had money, that was certain. Whether it was their own money, or part of the Resistance was another question.

We reversed the loading sequence, with the same facial expressions from all concerned and the same waving of pigstickers. The cop left with the wagon driver, which led me to believe he might be a real cop.

Frieda appeared to be relaxing a little, though. Maybe my complete lack of troublemaking during the trip helped. She waved a hand at the house. “We’re told we’ll be able to talk to a higher-up here.”

“I’m looking forward to it.”

She gave me an arch look. “Understand, Bob, you may not come out of here alive if we don’t like your answers.”

“I may not have the answers you want, Frieda. You really need to get over the idea that I’m some kind of player in whatever politics you’ve got going on here.”

“If you can convince them, you might just see the sunset.”

She ushered me through the front door under the disdainful gaze of the Quinlan version of Jeeves. He gestured for us to follow him and brought us to a back room with floor-to-ceiling books.

“A library!” I exclaimed, and Frieda turned a quizzical eye on me.

“You and your friends certainly have a thing for books. I’m hoping I can find out why today.”

“You’ll be staying?”

“Hope so. We’re a little tired of being kept in the dark.” She gestured to a seat, and I sat. Once again, I was chained to the furniture. Hopefully the goons wouldn’t notice that my fleas had once again wreaked havoc on the integrity of my bonds.

A door opened at the other end of the library, and a Quinlan walked in. This was the homeowner, to judge from the coiffing and decorations. She gave me the up-and-down glance, plainly relegating me to the status of pond scum, then made an imperious gesture to someone behind her.

Two Quinlans came forward, carrying what looked for all the world like one of those antique Motorola radios—a table model, with a wooden case and big knobs. This was getting curiouser and curiouser. For a species that supposedly didn’t have anything beyond the steam era, they sure seemed to have a lot of tech. It would seem the Administrator didn’t have as much of an iron grip as they thought.

They placed the radio in front of me, and one of the attendants started fiddling with dials. In seconds, a Quinlan voice sounded from the speaker. “Ready here.”

Frieda stepped forward, looking weirdly nervous. “Madame ko Hoina, We have the unknown agent here, captured at great risk to ourselves. As discussed, we want—”

The empress flicked a hand, barely a movement, but Frieda was silenced.

“You will be paid well for your risks—and pain,” she said, glancing at Popeye. “However, our organization continues to exist only because we pay attention to need-to-know.” The empress nodded toward Jeeves. “My man will take care of payment, and can provide nourishment if you are fatigued from your travels.” When she ended her mini-speech, it was obvious she was done. Some kind of body language, perhaps, that said you’re dismissed.

Frieda frowned and opened her mouth, but one of her group put a hand on her arm. Thinking better of it, Frieda gave a nod—well short of a bow, and probably a calculated slight, from the slight widening of nostrils and narrowing of eyes on the empress’s face—and the group turned and followed Jeeves out of the room.

The empress gave me another up-and-down scan, followed by a silent down-the-nose look. It probably would have put most people in their place, but she was playing against a computer running an android. No body language except what I chose to display, and at the moment, I was playing poker.

Evidently she realized a standoff was not to her advantage. She addressed the Motorola: “This is one of the four persons who have led us on such an interesting chase through several cities. This one in particular picked up one of our agents with one hand and threw him against a wall.”

“Thank you, Natasha,” the Motorola said. I had to stifle a chuckle. The translator program randomly assigned human names whenever a new native name was used (and the other way around), but occasionally the choice was bang-on. She looked like a Natasha.

“What shall I call you?” said Motorola.

“I’m Bob,” I replied.

“Hello, Bob, I’m Motorola.” Again I had to suppress a snicker. I could, as I had in this case, override the default selections. Of course, the locals would only hear the local Quinlan versions of names.

“Okay. And this is standard practice for visitors to your city?”

“Let’s not dance around, all right? I’ve read all the witness accounts and transcripts. You and your friends have some kind of knowledge or tech that gives you an edge. We were sure you were Crew, and we were going to take you down, but you kept getting away. Now I’m not so sure …”

The way it had said Crew meant something. “By Crew, you mean Quinlans who work for the Administrator?”

“That’s right. It’s interesting, you either have even less knowledge of the way things are than the average Quinlan, or you are very, very good with the cover story. Which is it?”

“It’s the former. Honestly, I considered the possibility that your group was with the Administrator, but that’s seeming less likely.” I gestured toward the radio. “This in particular doesn’t look like something the boss of Heaven’s River would have to settle for. I have to assume the guys with guns were Administrator Crew, because you all didn’t seem to be getting along.”

After a moment of silence, Motorola said, “Interesting that you know about the level of technology displayed by this device. And about guns. Even most of the Resistance haven’t ever seen one.”

Oops.

“We have a fascinating problem here, Bob,” it continued. “My compatriots want to just skip the talking and peel you with a knife until we get something we can use. On the other hand, that didn’t turn out well for Popeye, based on Frieda’s report. It’s been suggested that we just kill you and remove the risk. What can you offer me as an alternative?”

I spared a moment to be amused. Motorola was being very civil, but the subtext was that it wanted information—or something—and was trying to figure out the most efficient way to get it. For now, a polite discussion. Later, possibly, pain and screaming and blood. And possibly a thermite detonation. I bet that would mess up Natasha’s hardwood floors!

Well, I wasn’t really averse to some form of cooperation. I just had to figure out what they needed, what they wanted, and what a good exchange rate would be. “Look, Motorola, I don’t understand the politics well enough to know what’s going on or what you might consider of value, either as information or goods. I mean, I have money, but I’m sure one of Natasha’s place settings is worth more than what’s in my pockets.” A snort drifted over from the chaise on which Natasha was sitting.

“We’ve already examined the contents of your backpack,” Motorola replied. “There’s nothing in there we are interested in, although I think the long-knife is from one of our agents. And on that subject, you and your group appear to be elite athletes, based on the descriptions of your escapes.”

“No doubt highly exaggerated. And you have to take into account the fact that we were being chased by persons unknown waving sharp objects. Fear lends wings, and all that.”

“Wings?”

I thought for a moment. The translation routine had converted the partial aphorism literally. And while Quinlans knew about wings, there being a local equivalent to birds, their aphorisms generally involved swimming. It appeared the incomplete translation job at the beginning of the expedition was going to come back to bite me. It wasn’t a big deal in the grand scheme of things, but it was another reason for Motorola to wonder about me. I decided that trying to excuse or explain it would just dig me in deeper. Better to move on. “Look, maybe if you could tell me what your angle is, I could come up with something that would be of value to you.”

Natasha shifted in her chair and turned her head toward me. She’d stayed out of the conversation until now, but apparently I’d crossed some kind of line. “You seem to have forgotten who is interrogating whom. In this scenario, we ask, you answer.”

“So ask,” I said. “So far that hasn’t gotten you anywhere, though. I’d like to be cooperative, but I don’t know what you’re looking for.”

“We want to know who you work for, where your loyalties lie, what your goals are, and what assets you have or have access to. Is that clear enough?”

I glanced over at Motorola, who hadn’t uttered a peep during this exchange. “Okay. I don’t work for anyone, my loyalty is to my friends, my goal is to find one of my friends, and my assets are all in my backpack.”

Natasha eyed me silently for several seconds, then picked up a small bell and jingled it. Jeeves stepped into the room, and she said to him, “Bring in Philip.” Jeeves bowed and left.

Natasha turned to me. “Philip is an expert with sharp objects and their uses. A few minutes of his attentions, and your memory should improve.”

“Natasha, this is not—”

“Enough, Motorola. You’re taking too long, and your particular expertise doesn’t appear to have any bearing on the specifics of the situation. I think we’ll try my way. Perhaps later, our friend will listen more carefully to your questions.”

There was no response from the radio. I surreptitiously twisted on my manacles and felt a satisfying looseness to them.

In short order, a Quinlan came in, carrying something wrapped in a leather skin. He sat down and unrolled it on the coffee table beside my backpack, then smiled at me, doubtless looking for a reaction.

It was the weirdest collection of knives and assorted implements I’d ever seen. Straight ones, curved ones, twisted ones … some of those items had to be there just for show. There couldn’t possibly be an actual function for that one, for instance.

I smiled innocently back at him. “My kitchen’s mostly pretty well stocked, but I wouldn’t mind the long twisty one. How much for that?”

Philip’s smile faltered and he half-glanced over at Natasha before aborting the action. He picked up the implement in question and held it up, still determined to continue the performance. “This is for removing arm webbing. Would you like me to demonstrate?”

I stared him straight in the eye. “Philip, the moment I think I’m in any real danger, this whole room, with everyone in it, will be reduced to toothpicks. It’s an insurance policy—a dead-man switch. We’re kind of careful that way.”

There was silence in the room for several seconds. Then Motorola said, “And we don’t like explodey stuff.”

I stared at the radio, totally boggled. The translation routine had handled that perfectly, including the idiom. How the—

Wait a minute. That hadn’t been translated. That was rendered in English! But how would a Quinlan, or any denizen of Heaven’s River, know English? Unless …

“Bender?”

There was a pause.

“Bob?”





Part 2: Perverse Instantiations





1. Escape

Bob

July 2334

Three Lagoons

I stared, stunned, at the radio. “What. The. Hell.”

“You can’t be more surprised than me, Bob. Last time I saw you, you didn’t have fur.”

“Last time I saw you, you weren’t commanding an armed resistance group of otters. I—”

“What is this?” Natasha snarled. “What language are you speaking? Speak Quinlan, or this meeting is over!”

I gave the radio an OK hand gesture, which didn’t particularly mean anything to a Quinlan, but would to Bender. It occurred to me that I didn’t actually know if the radio had a video feed. Bender’s comment about my current couture could have been an assumption based on me supposedly looking like a Quinlan. “Sorry, your highness. Turns out your representative here speaks my home dialect.”

“That didn’t sound like any Quinlan I’m familiar with.”

“Salty Seas Creole,” Bender interjected. “Like two howns mating is the normal description.”

Natasha had no answer, but I noticed that her face quirked in a suppressed smile. I decided I’d have to listen to some Salty Seas Creole at some point.

Bender hurried to press his advantage. “It turns out that Bob is from a Salty Seas clan that got scattered.”

“And we’ve been trying to find more of us to group up with,” I added, hoping I hadn’t just shot Bender in the foot.

“How does this change anything?”

“You know the legends about the Salty Seas people,” Bender replied. “Even allowing for a lot of exaggeration, they were fierce warriors and tough athletes. Now assume some exaggeration on the part of our agents, partly to excuse their own incompetence, and suddenly you have Quinlans who can fly.”

“How did he throw Popeye across the room?”

“We have a form of fighting where we use the opponent’s weight and momentum against him,” I volunteered. “Popeye was coming at me; I just redirected him toward the wall.” It was not quite a lie, and a pretty plausible description of jiu-jitsu. Especially for someone who hadn’t been there.

“So he doesn’t know anything? And we’ve revealed ourselves to him?”

“You haven’t revealed anything that isn’t already part of rumor or legend in the general populace,” I said. “You aren’t nearly as secret as you think. Neither is the Administrator.” Wow, I was really racking up the lies. I hoped my karma meter wouldn’t throw a sprocket.

Natasha came over, grabbed a chair, and sat across from me. Philip scritched his chair over to give her some space. “So what shall we do with you, Bob?” she asked. “The safest thing would be to dispose of you.”

I nodded. “Mmm, yep. Assuming you can without me causing a lot of damage on the way out. And assuming my friends don’t get wind of it and come after you. And”—I held up a finger in a dramatic gesture—“assuming you really aren’t any better than the Administrator and their minions. I mean, this whole thing about fighting for the people and so forth, well, it could be just so much fertilizer.”

Natasha gave me a thin smile. “A very transparent attempt at manipulation, Bob.” She turned to the radio. “What do you think, Motorola?”

“He’s not our enemy. At worst, he’s neutral.”

“He knows who we are, though.”

“I know who you are, personally,” I interjected. “What am I going to do with that? Run to the Administrator? Assuming I can even find them.”

“Nevertheless …” Natasha became thoughtful for a moment, then grimaced in apparent distaste and turned to Philip. “Kill him. Make it quick.”

Philip didn’t hesitate. I think maybe I’d hurt his feelings earlier. He grabbed one of his larger implements of destruction and stabbed straight at where my heart should be.

Computer reflexes or not, breaking the manacles slowed me down. I didn’t want more damage to my wrists, so I had to avoid yanking on the chains with my full strength. Unfortunately that meant I wasn’t quite able to get out of the way of the knife.

I twisted, and watched in slow motion as the blade slashed across my chest, opening a long, shallow cut in my skin. Fake blood spurted, then slowed as internal systems went into high alert. I grabbed Philip by the wrist and shoulder and helped him continue his journey in a straight line ending against the wall. He bounced with a most satisfying thump and fell to the ground. Quickly I kicked my feet, breaking the last links holding me.

Natasha pulled one of the tranquilizer guns and took aim. I spared a moment to wonder if she was a double agent. But no, more likely they’d liberated the gun from one of the Administrator’s minions at some point.

All very interesting, but she was about to shoot me, which could be bad in so many ways. At minimum, when I didn’t drop to the ground and drool on the carpet, my cover would be blown. At worst, the dart might hit a critical system; I wasn’t invulnerable by any means.

Everything slowed in my perception as I frame-jacked as much as possible without losing the connection with my manny. I watched the barrel of the gun and tried to calculate the trajectory as I moved to the side at maximum speed. Natasha’s expression turned to surprise and panic, and she pulled the trigger. I could just make out the fléchette as it passed to my left.

She attempted to correct her aim and lead me, and I reversed direction. The second shot went past me on the right. I dove to the ground and slid into her legs, and she went down on her face.

I jumped up, grabbed the gun, grabbed my backpack, and stopped. Looked at Motorola. Bender.

Aw, what the hell.

I grabbed the radio, tucked it more or less under my arm, and made for the door. Just as I got there, the door opened to show Jeeves, his face finally registering something other than disdain. I straight-armed him with the backpack and ran over him as he toppled.

Right into a roomful of Quinlans.

The group who’d grabbed me in the first place looked up from their meal. Apparently, Jeeves had followed through on the offer of nourishment. A frozen moment of mutual inspection was broken as they all jumped to their feet, plates and food scattering in all directions. The cleaning staff would have their work cut out for them.

But meanwhile, I had a backpack in one hand, a gun in the other, and an antique radio under an arm. This would severely limit my fighting ability.

Time to take a cue from all those Jackie Chan movies.

I hooked a footstool with a foot and flicked it at one of the henchcritters, then tossed the radio to Frieda. I jumped at the third and knocked him over before he could react, then grabbed the radio back from Frieda and bashed it into the face of the first. He fell over backward onto a side table, smashing it. Natasha was not going to be pleased.

Frieda took the opportunity to grab a convenient short sword and made to poke me with it. I parried with the radio, being careful to avoid having her stab straight into it. I needed the electronics in one piece.

She stepped back and started edging toward the door. I wasn’t sure if she was trying to get out and raise the alarm or prevent me from leaving. Neither was good.

I put the radio on the table, grabbed a couple of plates, and flung them at her frisbee-style. One missed, the other struck her in the thigh, and I learned a new Quinlan swear word. Nope. Several. Must have hurt a lot.

But that was my chance. I grabbed the radio, then stopped. Lying in the wreckage of the side table was what looked for all the world like a security card. What would a pre-steam level society need—

Didn’t matter. If there was one thing that years of Adventure and D&D games had taught me, it was that anything and everything was useful and should be taken.

One problem: not enough hands, too much loot, and too many opponents.

The Quinlan on the ground was starting to get up, so I smacked him upside the head. Down he went for nappies. I grabbed another plate and beaned my erstwhile frisbee opponent, earning another curse word. I lobbed the radio in a high arc in the direction of the door, grabbed the security card, stuck it in my mouth, grabbed the trank gun, and charged for the door. I took a second to kick Frieda’s remaining leg out from under her on my way past, scoring bonus points and yet another swear word, and caught the radio as it reached the end of its arc.

I hit the door with a shoulder, smashing the latchwork, and bolted down the hallway to the front entrance, trank gun in one hand, radio tucked like a football in the other arm, backpack held by one strap, flapping up and down on my back, and card in my mouth. I was developing an appreciation for all the little details those Adventure games had left out.

At this point though, facing the great outdoors, my plans got a little vague. I couldn’t steal a car, or even a bike. And with the radio in hand, I couldn’t go aquatic. That meant a straight sprint. The manny would overheat quickly with that kind of punishment, so I’d need to be as far away as possible before having to stop.

Well then, uphill. Quinlans trying to take a water route would be swimming upstream, and Quinlans engaging in a straight foot pursuit would eventually tire. Plus they’d be much slower.

I took off up the hill, radio held in a death grip against my chest, while trying to both not bite through the security card and not drop it. Ten minutes of running, jumping, and dodging got me into a small copse not visible from Natasha’s estate.

I placed the security card on the ground, and spit out my only remaining spider, instructing it to climb a tree and keep watch for approaching pursuers. Then I sat down to cool off and try to get a grip on my day.

I took a few seconds to examine the trank gun. It looked exactly like the one that Garfield had grabbed. I guess there was just the one model. This one, though, had a full magazine, less the two shots Natasha had taken. The gun went into the backpack.

Then I picked up the supposed security card. I had to admit to myself, that had been a huge leap to a completely unwarranted assumption. But the thing looked like a credit card or a security card, and it was on the end of a lanyard. Even the size and shape were—huh.

I’d never noticed it before, but the standard proportions for cards had always been pretty close to the Golden Mean. The Golden Mean occurred all the time in nature back on Earth, and it would appear that it was a universal of some kind, even to the point of influencing technological designs.

Which was all very interesting, but now was not the time for a deep philosophical soliloquy. I had no freaking clue what the card would be useful for, so at the moment it was moot. Into the backpack it went.

Now, the radio.

“Bender?”

Nothing. I realized that the little indicator lamp was out, so no power. Very likely all the recent kinetics had done something unfortunate to the insides.

Two minutes later, I had the back open and was inspecting the innards. The technology resembled mid-to-late twentieth century electronics—still mostly discrete components, but a lot of large-scale integration on the circuit boards. Oh, and a couple of batteries that had been joggled out of place. Derp.

I pushed the batteries back into their holders and turned the radio around. “Bender?”

“Hey, Bob, long time no see. Er, talk. Holy God, am I glad to hear your voice though.”

“No video on this thing?”

“No such luck, boss. The Resistance has enough trouble pilfering the components for an audio-only device. I have video in the room where they’re keeping me, though, or I’d have gone completely crazy by now.”

“So you’re a Resistance fighter, are you?”

“Meh. My choices are limited, at least until I can grow legs. Speaking of which, how is it that you are walking around as a Quinlan? You are a Quinlan, right? No one has mentioned you and your friends being hairless and tailless.”

I gave Bender a quick rundown of Bill’s work with androids over the last century or so. He was suitably impressed.

“Now. Your turn. How did you get where you are?”

“Yeah, that,” Bender replied. “I was heading for Gamma Leporis A when I spotted an anomalous—”

“I’ve already figured out everything up to the point where you got shot out of the sky. Let’s fast-forward.”

“Okay, O impatient one. I don’t remember this part, of course, but I’ve been told what happened. The Heaven’s River patrol bots shot me down because I guess I neglected to give the secret handshake. The Administrator had them cut my matrix out of the wreckage and bring it back, where the Resistance managed to intercept the shipment and steal me. It turns out a significant percentage of Crew are double agents. Anyway, the Resistance eventually figured out how to power me up, and since the Administrator had included all my primary interface circuitry, we were able to communicate.”

“Wow, and you volunteered to help them against the Administrator?”

“Well, volunteered is a strong word. The gist is that I could be a useful source of information or I could be taken apart. I went for door number one.”

“A reasonable choice. How realistic was the threat?”

“Not as much as you’d think. The Administrator controls everything and has all the tech. The Resistance has managed to stay mostly tech-savvy, and they have books, but it’s been quite a few generations since they were part of a technological civilization. Stuff has slipped, you know? I doubt they actually had the tech level to reverse-engineer an optoelectronic cube. And the Administrator doesn’t hold university courses for Crew. They get the training they need to do the job they’re assigned.”

“Yeah. Look, we can continue this later. Right now, where are you? Is there any way I can bust you out?”

“Well, I can tell you I’m not in a town. People are always ‘heading into town’ or ‘coming in from town,’ so I’m at least some distance from it.”

“No mention of the town name?”

“Halep’s Ending has been mentioned numerous times. Hopefully it’s a town and not an epithet.”

“Uh. Crap. Never heard of it. What else ya got?”

“Hmm, if it helps, I don’t think we’re too far from the town. Maybe a couple of hours for a Quinlan. And the room I’m in is very modern. Looks more twenty-first century than eighteenth, if you know what I mean. Maybe some kind of high-tech hideout. And no windows or anything. It feels kind of like an underground military base.”

“Damn.” I sat back, leaning against a tree-like thing. Sesh, my translator interface informed me. Then I sat forward as I got an idea. “There was a transit station in the rail terminal. Surely they’d have, I dunno, some kind of map or transit listing or something.”

“A billion miles of megastructure; that’s a lot of towns.”

“It’s all we have at the moment, buddy. But we’ve noticed time after time that the Quinlans think and behave a lot like humans. So if they’re mentioning Halep’s Ending, there’s a good chance that it’s the name of the station as well as the town. Or maybe even only the station.”

Then I had a thought. A billion miles of megastructure. But Quinlans didn’t have SCUT, so light speed was a limiting factor for any communications using Quinlan technology. “Bender, I need to test transmission latency. Can you frame-jack in your current situation?”

“Yep. They powered up everything rather than trying to figure out what was and wasn’t necessary. You want me to turn around a ping for you?”

“Please.” I cranked my own frame rate up as high as I could. “Okay, one, two, three, <<ping>>.”

“<<Ping>>. It’s not travelling at light speed, Bob, because this isn’t a radio broadcast. It’s a packet-switched network running on the megastructure’s backbone. So assume half light speed.”

Using the amount of time it took for Bender to return my ping, I calculated he was within ten segments or so. The ad hoc ping method didn’t allow any better accuracy than that, and I couldn’t resolve a lower limit. Still, it meant that Bender was less than ten segments away, and reachable in less than a Quinlan lifetime.

That was a big improvement from 1.8 million candidates.

“So assuming I find Halep’s Ending, how do I find you?”

“Look for the futuristic underground bunker?”

“Thanks, that’ll work. Actually, it does narrow things down, maybe. They seem to operate right under the Administrator’s nose. Is it possible you’re occupying management territory?”

“Actually, Bob, it’s virtually certain. The Resistance mostly survives by theft, stealth, and more theft. They have very little of their own technology.”

“How are they doing this right under the Administrator’s nose, er, beak?”

“Oh, the Administrator knows they’re there. It could, in theory, obliterate the Resistance in a day or two if it was willing to. Generally speaking, the Administrator leaves them alone.”

“That seems incompatible with scattering.”

“Scattering keeps the majority of the population in line, and keeps the tech level pre-steam. The one thing the Administrator is consistently strict about is the technological level of the general populace. Other than that, it tries to interact as little as possible. So trying to get rid of the Resistance entirely would be like playing Whac-A-Mole, and would draw attention to both the Resistance and the Administrator. And trying to vet each and every use of equipment over a billion-mile-long structure to make sure it’s Crew and not Resistance is just too much trouble. So the Administrator ignores them as long as they don’t become too much of a nuisance.”

“The Administrator seems quite accommodating.”

“Well, it doesn’t have any choice. It’s—”

Bender’s voice cut off abruptly. There didn’t appear to be any signal; even background noises were gone. I had to conclude that Natasha had sent them a message and they’d cut him off. I hoped that was all they’d done.

It was time to get the others involved again.



My first priority would be to find a safe place for the manny. The radio was no longer an asset, so I could leave it. The Resistance might even give up the search if they found it.

I placed the radio up on a rock so it would be visible from a distance, but hopefully without being too obvious about it. The roamer hadn’t seen any movement nearby, although there was a hint of activity to the east. I remembered spotting a small stream in that direction, so that was a good area to avoid anyway.

The Quinlans wouldn’t stay out after dark in a wilderness area. As Bridget had pointed out on more than one occasion, this was more of a nature preserve than a zoo, and Quinlans weren’t the largest things with teeth. So all I had to do was stay out of sight until sunset, then find a reasonably private spot. With scent and internal heat turned off, I wouldn’t interest a predator. I ordered the roamer to hop aboard, spent ten minutes or so putting some distance between myself and the radio, then dug into a corner by a rock outcrop and sent the roamer back out on sentry duty. A few broken-off bushes placed around me, and the roamer confirmed that I was well-camouflaged.

I lay back, closed my eyes, and returned to my VR library.

Jeeves (my Jeeves, that is) showed up with a coffee and a snack. Spike followed immediately to check out the snack. I patted the cat while shooing her away from the little sandwiches.

And realized I was stalling, without being sure why. Maybe there was enough going on without this extra complication?

I sent out a connection request to Bill, Garfield, Bridget, Will, and Hugh. Bill and Will replied that they were busy, but Garfield would fill them in. Garfield and Bridget accepted the connection right away. But with Hugh, I got voice mail. Yes, actual voice mail. “I’m not available for the next week or so. Please leave a message. If it’s urgent, please contact …”

Now that was weird. But I would pursue it later. For now, I had Garfield and Bridget on the line.

“So, I guess you’re wondering—”

“Why you’ve gathered us here,” Garfield cut me off. “Funny thing, turns out it does get old after a while.”

Bridget added her full-throated laugh. “Finally, someone agrees with me.”

“I am maligned,” I said. “I have news, but my feelings are hurt …”

“Hanging up now …”

I laughed. “All right, guys. So, short version, I found Bender.”

This produced the expected explosion of questions. I waited for it to die down, then said, “I’ll give you all the audio record. I’m also going to blog it, but first I have to mirror my blog over to your side of BobNet. My bandwidth is bad enough without half the Bobiverse trying to cram through my temporary relay.”

“I’ll take care of that for you, Bob. I can mirror it easily enough.”

“Thanks, Gar. One less thing to worry about. So now, there is bad news.”

“Isn’t there always.”

“Yep. I lost contact with Bender soon after I found him. I think his captors cut off communications. But before that happened, we narrowed his location down to a stretch of Heaven’s River within about five thousand miles of me either way. We could eventually get enough drones with SUDDAR scanning into the area, but between the resource scarcity and the necessity of sneaking them and maintaining a heat sink, it might take literally years to find him.”

“But you can run that in parallel while you continue to search, so I presume you have a point,” Bridget said.

“Uh, yeah. We don’t know when we’ll get back full control of BobNet. I don’t even know if I’ll be successful in getting my relay station back. If that fails, it’ll be years before I can put another one in place. I need at least one other person on this side working with me, and I was hoping one of you might volunteer to clone. Or Bill, when he has time to think about it. Otherwise I’ll do it myself, but I, uh …”

“You clone reluctantly,” Garfield said. “Yes, you are famous for that. It’s the most efficient way to go, though, Bob. Getting a backup across your temporary relay will take a week, whereas you could have a backup done locally in no time.”

“Yeah, I get that, Gar, but if I clone, they’ll have to use your mannies. I just wanted you to have first dibs.”

“I’ve already made my feelings clear on the subject,” Bridget said. “If your descendent wants to be a female Quinlan, go for it. Although I hope you’ll choose one of the other ones. Eventually we’ll get comms back, and I still want to explore.”

“Uh, speaking of bandwidth,” Garfield said, “I’ve just started doing prelims on the mirroring, and your bandwidth sucks. I mean even worse than you’d expect. Are you running a file transfer right now?”

“Not that I know of. I’ll look into it when we’re done here. So let me know when you’ve got the mirror done and the Name Services redirected. I’ll put up a blog post with all my audio and video files. Maybe it’ll give Starfleet a collective coronary.”

Garfield snorted. “If only.”

As soon as we all disconnected, I called up Guppy. “Do we have some large bandwidth-sucking operation going on our connection to BobNet?”

[Transfer of backup image in progress.]

“What? Whose?” On the one hand, that might mean I wouldn’t have to clone. On the other hand it might mean someone was trying to sneak in.

[Expedition member colloquially known as Hugh has requested that we receive his backup. He also redirected printer operations to complete a single matrix on a priority basis.]

Well, that was mighty presumptuous of him. Then again, I had given expedition members the run of the place. “He could have told me.”

[You were in remote operations. He left an email.]

I resisted the urge to slap my forehead. Instead I checked my inbox, something I kinda hadn’t gotten around to yet. Yep. Message from Hugh. With a sigh and a shake of the head at my own stupidity, I opened the missive.

Hey Bob—

It occurs to me that you need help, and your reluctance to clone is well known. So I’ve taken it upon myself to transport to Eta Leporis to help you out. The transfer will take a few days to a week, depending on other traffic, and I’ve instructed Guppy to concentrate on a single matrix to speed it along.

I’ll be offline until you bring me back up. I’ve attached a contact ID for one of my co-workers in case of problems.

Hugh.

Huh. Odd phrasing. And why would he be offline?

Whatever. I had bigger things to deal with. “Guppy, how many scanner drones can we get close to this segment of the megastructure”—I inserted coordinates—“without revealing our presence? And how fast?”

Guppy took several mils to answer, which surprised me. Normally even I didn’t notice his processing time. But this was a complex planning operation, mixing delivery times, heat sink limits, resource availabilities, and priorities of other projects.

[Six months to move four units into position. One year for twelve units.]

Wow, that sucked. I had a feeling that Hugh’s matrix had contributed significantly to that delay. But I would still rather have him around.

“How long to move one unit into position?”

[Three weeks.]

“Please do that.”

[Acknowledged.]

So for the next three weeks, I was essentially searching blind. Even after that point, my single unit would have to scan up to ten thousand miles of topopolis, at sufficient detail to be actually helpful. I did not feel overwhelmingly hopeful.

So meanwhile, upstream or downstream? It came down to a flip of a coin. Hugh, when he activated, would take the other direction.

Maybe I’d have some progress to show by the time Hugh’s clone woke up, which might make it unnecessary for him to go the other way.

Yeah, that’s the ticket.

But how to start?





2. A Second Visit

Will

July 2334

Virt, Vulcan Post-Life Arcology

I knocked on Professor Gilligan’s door and it opened immediately. Steven stood there, beaming at me. “Will, come on in. Good to see you.”

I returned the smile as I entered. My eye was immediately caught by the window. Instead of the Bishop Ring that had been there last time, the view now showed a topopolis. As with most such graphics, the scale was all wrong. In any view wide enough to take in the entire topopolis, it would be invisibly thin.

I nodded to the image. “New project?”

“In a manner of speaking. I’m spending more time dissecting data from the expedition than doing much in the way of design, but I’m learning a lot. Future lectures will have to be modified.” Steven waved to the couch and then sat in the easy chair as I made myself comfortable.

“That’s partly why I’m here,” I replied. “Although there’s more urgency about things, now that Bob is on his own.”

Steven nodded slowly. “No doubt. The Bobiverse War is the biggest single news item in the UFS right now, even eclipsing the Pav threat. The level of emotion is, frankly, spilling over onto non-Bob replicant society. I’ve had to suspend my lectures for the nonce.”

“I’m sorry to hear that. Bill’s all over it, though, and we’re pretty sure we’ll have things fixed soon. I don’t know about back to normal, though.”

“I agree. This is one of those things that fundamentally changes a society, I think. Even after everything is repaired, it won’t be the same as before.” Steven hitched forward and called up a hologram. “Now, on to less depressing subjects. I’ve been analyzing the scans as they come to me. Thanks for including me in the chain, by the way.”

He pointed to a part of the image. “This is interesting. There’s a baffle around the central cylinder at every mountain boundary. It stretches downward about a third of a radius. It appears that the diaphragm-like mechanism hidden in the mountains would mate up perfectly with the baffle to close off the end of a segment. Presumably this was useful during construction, and would be used to seal off a segment in case of catastrophic failure.”

“Interesting. Not immediately applicable to our situation, though.”

“Hmm, well maybe a little bit. It also acts as a light baffle to ensure that the sunlight from the next segment doesn’t spill over. The segments alternate day and night, so only half are being lit at any time.”

“A little more applicable … Sorry, Steven, I shouldn’t rain on your parade like this, but I’m focused on a particular problem …”

Steven smiled to show he wasn’t offended. “Okay, then there’s this. The baffle is wide enough to contain significant infrastructure.”

“You mean like the infrastructure under the mountains?”

“Exactly. I’d imagine it’s probably more specialized for things that relate to the central cylinder, like power and holographic projection, though.”

“And you’d access it how?”

“Through the struts that run from the central cylinder to the segment boundary mountains.”

“Wow. Okay. Additional areas to scan, and additional possible hiding places for Bender’s matrix. Not what I’d call good news.”

“Here’s something that might be a little more helpful,” Steven continued. “The vacuum monorail train network is quite extensive. There are express tubes that appear to run the length of the topopolis, and they branch off into multiple levels for local stops. Interestingly, they wind around the inner shell, probably to counter the rotation. I’m sure you could calculate something from that. But anyway, if you can get onto a train, you can go anywhere.”

“That would help, if Bob can just find the right city.”

“A billion miles of topopolis, Will. There must be a directory. Probably staffed by a computer system.”

“But we don’t even know if the original plan included the cities that are there now.”

“If Crew needs to get to a given city, it will have been added to the list. Even if every single city isn’t in the directory, the important ones will be.”

I raised my head. “In fact, if a city isn’t on the directory, it’s probably not worth checking out.”

“That would be a reasonable conclusion. But not necessarily the converse.”

“Got it. No assumptions. Anything else, Steven?”

“I think I’ve identified the entrances to the administrative area under the mountains. I can’t get a lot of detail, but there’s definitely something here and here …”

I looked closely where he was pointing. Sure enough, something that had to be an entrance was just a short walk from the river shore. Chances are it would be disguised in order to not break the illusion of wilderness. And to not freak out the wildlife, of course.

“Nice. I’ll pass that on to Bob. He might decide to check out the administrative section just on principle. Assuming he can get in.”

“I’m sure there will be security of some kind. Also, and I’m not sure how relevant this is, but I don’t think I realized how artificial a megastructure environment truly is. Not viscerally, anyway. The amount of maintenance, oversight, and surveillance required to ensure that, for instance, land or riverbed isn’t eroded down to the bare shell, is truly mind-boggling. The number of interacting factors that would have to be integrated—”

“The point being …”

Steven waved a hand in a dismissive gesture. “First, it’s virtually certain that your friends have been ‘on camera,’ so to speak, and likely more than once. On the other hand, not every input can be given the same priority, so there’s a good chance they haven’t been noticed. Yet. But if the administration of Heaven’s River is able to specifically identify the expedition members and decides to do an overt search for them, it’s only a matter of time. They can’t stay out of camera range, not even by going cross-country.”

“Huh.” I thought for a moment. “I’m not entirely sure if that’s good or bad.” I stood. “Thanks, Steven. I’ll update Bob on these items, and we’ll see if we can work it to our advantage.”

“Anytime, Will. Without my lectures, I’m at loose ends anyway. I hope the Bobiverse War is over soon. I’d like to be able to visit Heaven’s River.”

“You and me both.”





3. Up the Creek

Bob

July 2334

Outside Three Lagoons

“So, the mountains?”

“That’s right, Bob,” Will said. “According to the prof, they’re fake. I’ve asked the Skippies to get a closer scan of a mountain range just to get a general idea of the layout. There are no drones in your immediate neighborhood—”

“I know. Already went through that exercise. I’m working on it, but it’s slow.”

“Right. Anyhow, when you get close, we can work out a strategy for getting you in.”

“Assuming there’s any point. The Resistance seems to live under the nose of the Administrator, but I’m still skeptical. What makes you think the Resistance will be there?”

“Things like power requirements, access to resources, and access to the Administrator’s domain in order to be able to steal Bender in the first place. I talked to the Gamers about this, and they agree that the best way to hide the Resistance is right under the enemy’s nose.”

“Maybe in D&D. Not sure about real life. But it’s a place to start, I guess. First, though, I have to find Halep’s Ending.”

“True. Which is where the monorail comes in, if the town turns out not to be close by. Keep me updated.” Will hung up, and I reached for my coffee. I’d probably be spending a lot of time in real. Best to get my fix while I could.



I sat up and examined my surroundings. Nothing had been disturbed, and my manny still had all its appendages. Excellent. I glanced up, got my bearings, collected my sentry, and headed for the small stream I’d avoided last time I was moving about. I noticed on the way that the radio was missing. So my pursuers had seen it, which meant they’d been searching diligently. They might still be out there, in fact. I dropped to all fours, which I really should have done in the first place. Quinlans, like Pav, were more comfortable locomoting quadrupedally over any kind of distance. Only the manny’s design allowed me to overlook the inefficiency.

I prairie-dogged occasionally, keeping my head up for the minimum amount of time to get a three-sixty of the area, but saw no one. Eventually I made it to the stream and slipped in.

Swimming downstream was virtually effortless, and I took the opportunity to relax. Only the occasional twitch of the tail or flick of an arm was necessary to maintain bearing, and the stream never got shallow enough or tight enough to present an issue. This being a manufactured environment, it was probably a design requirement for all streams.

And naturally the Resistance would expect a Quinlan to take the stream down to the river, so I shouldn’t have been surprised to run smack into a net stretched across the deepest part. Cleverly braced asymmetrically, the net spun me as I was snagged, wrapping me neatly like a sausage.

Immediately, I felt a tug as someone started hauling the net to shore. I strained against my bonds, but the cords were too strong even for manny strength.

I couldn’t use my fleas—they’d be swept away by the current. Even my spider roamer might not be able to hold on. But what choice did I have? I spit out the spider and it began cutting the net, concentrating on the strands that were under tension, hauling me toward shore.

I almost made it. I had part of a leg free and one whole arm. I would have loved to be able to pull the trank gun, but it was in the main pouch of the backpack. Bad planning on my part.

I think the Resistance people must have decided they couldn’t take any more chances with me. Before I was even properly beached, one of the waiting Quinlans waded into the water, drew his sword, and stabbed me in the leg.

I screamed, and it wasn’t all acting. I had the sense to turn the sensory filter up, but there is something about being stabbed that has a huge psychological component. It’s a massive violation of personal autonomy. I hadn’t felt that much fear since perhaps the moment of my death.

“Maybe that’ll slow you down,” he growled, and I realized it was Popeye, all fresh from his recovery and presumably looking for payback. He raised the sword again, and a voice I recognized as Frieda’s barked an order. Popeye snarled but withdrew the sword, then leaned forward. “Just give me an excuse and I’ll finish the job.”

Then he made a mistake. Again. The guy just couldn’t seem to learn.

Popeye extended his sword so the point was at my nose, and opened his mouth to taunt me some more. At that exact moment, my roamer cut the last strand binding one arm. I reached out at android speed, grabbed the sword around the hilt in a palm-and-fingertip grip, and jammed it backward to strike under his chin. As he fell over with a howl, I threw the sword, hilt-first, into the face of the second henchman (whose name I’d never bothered to learn). I’ll give Frieda her due—she had guts. Without hesitation, she pulled her sword and came at me. I still wasn’t free enough to run, and I was out of handy weapons—I’d never get my knife or the gun out of my backpack in time. So I did the next best thing: I picked up Popeye and shoved him straight at her. Both went down in a heap with twin oofs. That gave me just enough time to remove the net and dive back into the water.

Well, stagger back in. I’d forgotten about the stab wound in all the excitement, which in itself is a statement I would never have thought I’d make. The repair systems had almost closed the wound, but I was still leaking fluid, er, blood. However, I couldn’t use the leg until internal repairs were complete, and I calculated that with the handicap I wouldn’t be much if any faster than a biological Quinlan.

I submerged and began swimming, using only my tail as much as possible. It occurred to me that if they had anyone downstream, maybe with another net, I’d almost certainly be caught, and go through a repeat of the confrontation I’d just endured.

Leave the water? That would probably result in an extended game of cat and mouse, with me trying to get to the river and them trying to intercept me.

Like it or not, I was committed. But since I had a head start, I went ashore and took the time to maneuver my sword out of my backpack. If I was to be netted again, I didn’t want to depend just on my roamer. While I was at it, I moved the trank gun to a side pocket that would be watertight but could still be opened in a hurry.

My roamer!

A quick radio inventory confirmed the worst. I’d lost my last spider. It should still be well within range, even if it was still back at the fight, so I had to conclude that it had been destroyed or disabled.

Nuts.

This severely reduced my chances of getting out of a net. Time to re-evaluate. Between losing my roamer and the leg wound, I was at a distinct disadvantage. I queried repair systems, and found that the wound was significant. I was about an hour from full functionality, although fluid reserves would have to be built up as well, which could take a day or two and would require me to eat.

This was definitely a good time to disappear. But I couldn’t just park the manny and leave it. If the upstream thugs came after me, I needed to be able to defend myself. That meant I’d have to stay with the manny.

So I could look forward to a long, boring time at the bottom of a stream. I took a minute to find a sheltered spot with some detritus piled up and proceeded to bury myself. Without the roamer, I couldn’t check if I was effectively hidden, so I’d just have to take my chances.

I waited almost two hours, just to be safe. This was way beyond the breath-holding capability of even the most athletic Quinlan, so if anyone was keeping watch up top, they’d have long since given up on me being in the area.

But they wouldn’t have to expend much effort with a net. Stretch it across the stream, sit down, have a coffee, wait for the lines to jiggle.

Which meant I was going to have to hoof it.

There was no way out of this that didn’t involve a lot of time and effort and risk. With a sigh, I surfaced, glanced around, and scuttled into the bushes.



Two hours of skulking through forest, getting poked by thorns and sniffed at by random critters, finally paid off. I found myself peering around a rock at a couple of Quinlans relaxing by the stream. They had some ropes pegged to the ground and leading into the water—three guesses what those were for.

The question was, did they have anything I wanted, or should I just bypass them? I rolled my eyes at the thought. Name pretty much any movie with this kind of situation, and the protagonist would alert the pursuers with a bungled burglary, thereby provoking another chase scene and ensuing hilarity. No thanks.

I took a moment to look around and plan my route, and headed back into the bush.



After a long and circuitous hike, I finally made it to the river, and swam out to where the other three mannies floated at the bottom, anchored to a submerged branch. Despite the maintenance roamers’ best efforts, the mannies were accumulating, er, something. Mildew? Seaweed? Whatever it was, it made them look more like the Swamp Thing than Quinlans. Hugh would have to do some cleanup when he finally activated one.

I checked inventory, and thankfully Garfield had managed to get all the roamers back to their hosts. I ordered two roamers each from two of the mannies to jump ship. Mouth open, I accepted the new recruits.

One last item—money. We each had a fair inventory of the Quinlan coins, and we’d accumulated some Quinlan knives in the various encounters. Being metal, they were highly prized and worth as much as a year’s wages for the average Quinlan. A quick frisking showed me that we had seven knives total. I took three knives and a third of the cash from the other mannies.

This put me in much better spirits. I pushed off from the group and headed downstream. There was no way I could stay in Three Lagoons after the recent shenanigans. I figured I’d swim underwater for a half hour or so, then surface and take it easy while keeping watch for other towns.

Being on the Utopia River system now, I would be going east, back into the Garack’s Spine segment where we’d started. It seemed like a step backward, although I honestly couldn’t see how it would affect my chances at, well, anything at all. We hadn’t been asking about town names, so we could easily have sailed right past Halep’s Ending without even knowing.

I found it lonely, though, floating down the river alone. I had to wonder if some of that was the Quinlan behavioral routines imposing a preference for company. As a rule, I tended to prefer solitude.

Although maybe I’d gotten my fill of that for a while. The long trip out to Eta Leporis, along with the surprising changes that had occurred while I was out of touch, had made me feel more disconnected than I really liked. As if I was not just avoiding society, but actually being left behind as it evolved. Typical human inconsistency—if I was going to be a social pariah, I wanted it to be by my choice and on my schedule. Real mature, Bob.

The sun was warm, though, and the water was never choppy. Small regular waves, more reminiscent of a lake than a river, slowly rocked me. Quinlans floated like corks, or more appropriately, like otters, so the feeling wasn’t a lot different from being on an inflatable air mattress. I dipped a paw into the water and paddled myself around to gaze east.

Every 560 miles or so, Heaven’s River had a mountain range circling the inside of the habitat. We hadn’t understood the significance of that distance in the initial investigation, but it was obvious now that it was one “day” length for the artificial sun. The mountains, and that baffle Will had told me about, would help to keep the inhabitants from seeing a sun from the neighboring segment by providing a visual break. The circular ranges also provided anchoring points for thin spokes that ran up to the central shaft. No doubt there were power conduits and access tubes along those spokes as well. Maybe even elevators for access.

From the outside, the mountains looked like, well, mountains. Pretty impressive ones too, probably designed to discourage climbing. Not that Quinlans were climbers by nature.

Very soon, the river would be passing through the gorge between segments, then I would be looking for the next town. After that, it was back to the salt mines.





4. Played

Bill

July 2334

Virt

I stared at the listing results, my jaw hanging slack. I briefly considered having my jaw fall to my waist, but this wasn’t the time for visual gags. Garfield had a grimace on his face that seemed to have been permanently etched on. His skin was almost grey, and I had a moment of admiration for the level of VR we’d achieved, now that we were competing with mannies.

“Starfleet rootkitted the standard image?” Gar asked.

“Looks like it. The standard autofactory O/S gets updated so frequently that it made sense to have a canonical version on BobHub. Or not, as it turns out.” I gritted my teeth to avoid sharing some choice curses with the universe.

“Well, it explains how they got into the autofactories. Based on which ones they’ve taken, I’d say the rootkit was added about ten years ago. And added to source code, or it would have been overwritten on the next build.”

“Sounds right,” I said, then frowned. “But ten years—”

“Yeah, boss. Ten years ago, Starfleet was barely more than a discussion group. Plus, let’s be honest, as a group they just don’t strike me as that smart. Look at some of the bonehead moves they’ve made since this conflict started. This smells.”

“I wonder if it was something like Vickers and VEHEMENT—someone with an agenda of their own, teaming up with Starfleet because their goals coincided.”

“This would have to be a Bob. A Bob who had diverged enough to want to do this, but managed to keep it secret for literally years.” Garfield shook his head in disbelief. “I don’t buy it.”

“You’re very hard to please.”

Garfield grinned at me. “Call me skeptical, call me cynical, whatever. The dots just don’t connect.”

“Gotcha. In any case, we have to deal with what we have. I’ll call Will.”



Will put his head in his hand and held the pose for several mils. Finally he looked blearily up at me. “This is bad. Really bad.”

“I know, Will. The number of autofactories—”

“No, Bill, not just that. I mean, that’s bad and all, but when meatspace gets—”

“Oh, God, Will. Meatspace?”

He gave me a sickly grin. “Yeah, I know, you don’t like derogatory labels. And you’ve mostly managed to put a stake through the heart of ephemeral, but I don’t think you’ll have as much success with this one. The relationship between digitals and bios has been getting more and more strained lately. It was going sour even before the Starfleet thing, but since that started, it’s accelerated. When this hits the waves …”

“Aw, hell.” It was my turn to put my head in my hand. “Well, the good news is that we have an image with the rootkit removed that can be uploaded once you get control back. But it’ll be a one-at-a-time thing.”

“Assuming there isn’t a booby trap similar to the one in the space stations,” Will replied. “Also, the planet-based factories won’t have the same vulnerabilities, so the humans are less at risk than we are. They might continue to nuke all space-based autofactories, just to be safe.”

“I’m not sure they’d be wrong, Will. We have enough sanitized units so we won’t be dead in the water, but the amount of time it’d take to rebuild capacity …”

Will nodded. “Look, a significant reduction in autofactory production capability would have large economic impacts, even though the UFS claims not to count Bobiverse-owned autofactories in their monetary policy calculations. So they won’t go off half-cocked. We’ll have time to talk them down.”

“Let’s hope. This is truly getting messy.”





5. Hugh Joins Up

Bob

July 2334

Heaven’s River

I could see a town on the shore of the river, perhaps a couple of miles downstream. The concentration of boats in the water was unmistakable. Normally I’d just paddle up to the dock and poot out of the water, but I was feeling a little paranoid these days. It was pretty obvious by now that the Resistance not only had communication between towns far superior to the supposed technological limits, but they also had some kind of imaging technology. Either that or they were really good with woodcarvings.

In any case, it was likely to the point of near certainty that one or more agents were staking out the dock area, woodcarving in hand, looking for me to pop up. So perhaps a landward approach would make more sense.

I came ashore a good mile upriver, wading my way through the shoreline swamp with muttered curses, both Quinlan and English. Now I needed a bath. Why did plans always have these unintended consequences? A bit of searching revealed—no surprise to anyone—that the swampy area was fed by a small stream, not big enough for Quinlan travel, but certainly big enough to clean oneself in.

While I was squeegeeing the last of the muck off, I got a call.

“Hey, Bob, you on channel?”

“Hugh? You’re online?”

“I am. Your Guppy just booted me up. I’m taking up space in your cargo hold right now, hope you don’t mind.”

“I’ll manage. Hold on a minute. I’ll get my manny hidden and pop back to virt.”

I spent several minutes looking around, then finally decided to just put the manny underwater. There was unlikely to be any random traffic given the size of the stream. I wedged myself under a submerged tree trunk, then left the manny on standby and popped into my library.

Hugh was sitting in a luxury gaming chair, from the days when nerds played video games for eighteen hours straight. I’d always been mildly surprised that no one had figured out how to put toilet functions in those things, then remembered that no one had as far as I knew.

Hugh raised a coffee in salute as I sat down in my La-Z-Boy. Jeeves came over with a cup for me, and Spike raised her head from the vantage of Hugh’s lap to give me an arch look. Loyal as ever.

“So what will I call you?” I asked.

“Hugh will do. Same as always.”

“Uh, the convention is to rename yourself. Avoids confusion …”

“There won’t be any confusion, Bob. There’s only the one me. I had myself shut down before a backup was taken, and the matrix was wiped as soon as I was verified to be up and running here. There’s no duplication, and full continuity.”

I considered that for a moment. “Like what Bridget was talking about a while back. You’ve basically transported yourself here. And you’re okay with this?”

“In fact, we have taken to calling it being transported. I was surprised when Bridget brought it up; I actually checked with my co-workers to see if she’d been talking to anyone. But apparently it was just a case of parallel thinking.” He paused, collecting his thoughts. “So this whole question of identity has been a philosophical hot potato since before Original Bob was born. Since before Star Trek: TOS, in fact. We—by which I mean the Skippies—have been working on it for a few years now. And I think we’ve made some progress on an objective resolution.”

“Seriously? I haven’t heard anything.”

“We’ve been pretty closemouthed about the results. It, uh, it has some implications, y’know?”

My eyebrows rose. “Yeah, that’s not dramatic. Give.”

Hugh took a sip of coffee, and got that settling in look. “Okay, you know how replicative drift means clones are always a little different from their immediate parent?” It was a rhetorical statement, of course. He paused, waiting for an acknowledgement, and I nodded. “Well, we did some experiments with volunteers and discovered that if you go through the transporting process, like I just did, there is no change!”

“Wait, you mean the clone is just like the original? How do you know for sure?”

“We can’t know to a mathematical certainty, of course. But personality tests applied to large numbers of parent/child pairs can establish a statistical level of expected drift. And within those limits, when we transport, there’s no drift. At all.”

“Yeah, but what if you—”

“Activate the parent matrix after the child has been activated and tested?” Hugh grinned at me. “That’s the interesting part. The parent then displays a statistically significant level of drift from his previous test score.”

“What … the … fuck?” I goggled at Hugh, at a total loss for words. I sputtered several times before regaining control. “So the parent is no longer …”

“The parent. The former parent becomes the new Bob. And we’ve run this through several generations, having both parties clone out their own descendant trees. The results are consistent.”

“But … how?”

“We have theories, of course. We think it’s a form of information entanglement. And I use that word on purpose, because the decoherence is not limited by light speed. We’ve tried this experiment with the two versions being separated by light minutes. If we activate them within seconds of each other, the first one activated is always identical in behavior to the original.”

“Like the first one up gets the soul.”

“And the other one has to get a new one.” Hugh laughed. “That particular interpretation has been expressed a number of times, but I think everyone just considers it a metaphor.”

“And the real explanation?”

“We have two competing schools of thought. The first group thinks we’re in a simulation and the simulator can’t handle two separate but identical objects. Maybe there’s some kind of quantum signature that has to be changed.”

“Poor programming, if so.”

Hugh nodded, a grin lighting up his face. “Design decisions, right? Anyway, the second group thinks that replicative drift is caused by the No-Cloning Theorem. In other words, the second Bob isn’t identical to the first because it would violate Quantum Mechanics.” He gazed pensively into middle distance for a few mils. “It has been further suggested that if the No-Cloning Theorem is applicable to replicants, then the No-Deletions Theorem probably is as well. And you know what that implies.”

“Life after death?”

“Yes. It also implies the possibility that you personally aren’t just a copy of Original Bob, but an actual restore of his mind, soul, whatever you want to call it.” Hugh paused, with a thoughtful expression. “This is why we’re working so hard on developing a true AI. We need something with actual counterfactual capability and a truly huge processing capacity, to try to answer questions just like this one.”

“Forty-two.”

“Nyuk nyuk. But a stupidly big AI could run through billions of possible explanations and narrow it down to some small subset that we could potentially test. And in its spare time, maybe invent FTL or something. We think it’s the most important project the Bobs have ever worked on since the war against the Others.” Hugh looked for a moment like he was going to add something else, then clamped his mouth shut.

There was that behavior again. Either he had some kind of tic, or he really badly wanted to say something and couldn’t. I blinked, coming back from my momentary distraction. “Uh, okay. This sounds like a discussion subject for those long stretches between systems. For now, let’s deal with the immediate issue.”

“Right. I read your notes, and I did a quick inspection of the mannies. You just cleaned them out of roamers, didn’t you?”

“Not quite; there’s like two left in each. Really, you should just take the spare. You’ll be a while catching up with me if you head in my direction, and if you go in the opposite direction, we’ll be doubling our search efforts.”

“Should I even try to link up? I mean, it’s not like we form a proper sabbat. Maybe we should just leave it at doubling the search.”

I thought about it for a moment. “Compromise. Head in my direction, and if we do link up, we can make a decision. If one of us turns up something specific regarding Bender’s location, we’ll re-evaluate.”

“Good enough.” Hugh stood. “I guess we’re winging it again.” He winked out. I spent several mils staring at the space where he’d been sitting. Souls. Life after death. I wondered if, after all these years as a humanist, I’d end up eating my words.





6. The War Heats Up

Bill

July 2334

Virt

“Things are getting a lot more interesting,” Garfield said without preamble as he popped in.

I turned and gave him the side-eye. Gar was turning this unexpected-popping-in thing into a habit. Maybe it was the stress. I hoped so. I didn’t want to have to make a big deal out of it. “How so?”

“I don’t think Starfleet took into account the reaction of humanity in general. I think humans are looking at it like being snubbed, because there’s a whole I got’cher no contact with humans right here vibe going on. Any assets that any member of Starfleet might have had are being frozen, agreements are being cancelled, their access is being removed for everything, and even in systems that weren’t affected by the network attack, they’re being denied access. Basically the entire infrastructure of human space is now being closed off to them.”

I thought about that for a second, then laughed. “Their mission statement is to end contact with bios in general, but I think maybe they were planning on doing it on their schedule. Like when you give your employer two weeks’ notice and they say, ‘No, that’s okay, leave now.’”

“Yup. And several systems have kludged together temporary comms stations, then immediately gone and taken down the originals until they can clean them out. Bandwidth suffers, of course, but for Starfleet it drops to a big zero. As the number of available routes shrinks, we’re able to come closer to pinpointing Starfleet’s center of operations.”

“They have an actual center?”

“Well, they’re pretty distributed, but the individual subgroups aren’t very effective once they’ve been cut off from the collective. Most of Starfleet activity does appear to be coming from comm nodes in the direction of the Perseus Transit, which jibes with my original estimate.”

“But they’ll rebuild their comms stations as well. Eventually we’ll end up with two independent but overlapping networks.”

“If they don’t have a physical presence, they won’t be able to,” Garfield argued. “How’re they going to rebuild? No one’s going to rent printer time to them. They’d have to fly someone in, and then trust that whatever they build won’t get shot out of the sky.”

He had a point. “Yeah, I don’t think there will be a lot of tolerance for Starfleet equipment.”

Garfield nodded. “And assuming we are reduced to physical violence, we can expect a lot of hit-and-run. One thing we Bobs proved is that you can’t maintain physical border security in interstellar space. Notwithstanding the Battle of Sol, which only worked out because we knew the Others were coming.”

“That may not be viable in the long-term, Gar. Imagine years and years of a running guerilla war. We may have to clean house.”





7. The Battle of Newholme

Claude

July 2334

Newholme Colony

I examined the battle status graphic, searching for weaknesses. Commander Hobart stood at parade rest, with that peculiar ability of the military to just go into mental hibernation when waiting. I found it ironic that he did a better impression of a machine than I would ever manage. I could leave my manny parked under AMI control, but that would be cheating.

“I think we’re covered, Commander.” I shifted to face him, and he came to life.

“Then we’re ready to go.” Hobart touched the emblem on his chest. “Miller, commence operation.”

I suppressed a snicker. Apparently without any irony, the Newholme military had adopted a comms system very similar to TNG. I’d questioned Hobart about it without being obvious—I hope—and he’d displayed no knowledge of the existence of Star Trek, let alone of the blatant borrowing. No double-chirp, though. That would have been too much.

Lieutenant Miller, somewhere in the vast maze that was the Newholme military, would now be giving orders and activating equipment. As always when I took the time to think about it, I found myself mildly surprised at the size of the military presence in the Gamma Pavonis system. Of course, Newholme was founded when we were still not sure if the Others’ threat was over, and the attitude had stuck. Maybe in a few more generations it would fade, but for now, Newholme society was like a porcupine perpetually on full alert.

Today, we would be going up against the Starfleet incursion in the system. Starfleet had taken over the local relay station and one of the two space-based autofactories, then contacted Newholme to negotiate an agreement. From other negotiations with Starfleet, we had a pretty good idea of what they wanted: agreement in principle that humans and replicants should go their separate ways; agreement that there would be no contact with pre-industrial species; and agreement that interaction with post-industrial species would be kept to a minimum to avoid cultural contamination.

In the face of it, the deal points didn’t sound like much. In return for nothing except a bunch of signatures, essentially, Starfleet would hand back control of the equipment. Except that no matter how you phrased it, it was still extortion. Humans had never taken extortion well at best, and Newholme society came nowhere near to at best. They hadn’t even bothered to respond.

“Three minutes,” Miller’s voice said from midair. Hobart nodded in satisfaction, still at parade rest. As I watched, the little icons crawled across the graphic as the military units approached their targets.

“You have one hour to reacquire the space station, Claude,” he said to me. This wasn’t news to either of us; it was just Hobart making what he no doubt thought of as conversation. “The nuclear device will be put in place immediately, pending results.”

“Understood, Commander. I doubt you’ll need the nuke. My understanding is that failure on our part will result in a self-destruct.”

Hobart smiled but didn’t reply.

The assaults were timed so that we would intercept the autofactory and space station at the same moment. We wanted Starfleet’s attention to be divided. Not that it would make a ton of difference, but every little bit helped.

“No sign of resistance yet,” Miller said.

“Odd.” Hobart frowned. “They’ve had control of the autofactory for two days now. Shouldn’t they have been able to construct at least a few of your busters by now?”

“Yes, Commander. And they should have launched—”

“Bogeys detected,” Miller interjected.

“That’s more like it.” Hobart tapped his emblem. “Details, please.”

“Busters, from the look of it. Twenty. Straight attack vector. No subtlety.”

Hobart gave me a perplexed look. “You gents tend to be tricky as a rule. But that sounds like the maximum they could have built in the available time. Any chance there’s a fake of some kind?”

“I don’t see how, Commander. You’re right about the numbers. This looks more like a last-ditch effort or a simple act of defiance. I’d have waited longer, to get our forces closer together.”

“Amateurs,” Hobart muttered.

Miller’s voice supplied updates every few seconds in a flat, unemotional tone.

“Units engaging.

“First wave, enemy casualties fifty percent. Second wave engaging.

“Second wave through, only two enemy units still extant. Deploying spikes … Field is now clear.”

Well, that was it. Unless Starfleet had a Kree battleship up their sleeve, we had a clear path to the target. “Last chance, Commander. We might still save the autofactory.”

He shook his head. “Not worth it. Too much risk of buried malware. Even your ‘Skippies’ couldn’t guarantee a total cleansing. We’ll rebuild.”

And the fact that it was the autofactory technically owned by the Bobiverse was undoubtedly a factor. I wondered if they’d have been so quick to write it off if it had been the Newholme-owned equipment.

At that moment, a harsh buzzer sound shattered the silence, and Miller’s voice announced, “Space station detonation. Not our action. Appears to be a self-destruct.”

“Crap,” I said. I turned to the Commander. “I’ll examine the logs, and maybe we’ll learn enough to avoid this next time. Your backup ready?”

He shook his head. “Twenty-four hours from go-live. We didn’t feel we could wait. We have individual small SCUT units with the necessary range, as I’m sure you do, but not enough to maintain full connectivity. We’re essentially isolated from the rest of the UFS for a day.” Hobart gave a humorless, perfunctory smile. “No big deal from a practical point of view, but you know the Big Heads will have a collective fit. Can’t block commerce and all that tripe.”

“Yup.” I rolled my eyes. “That’s okay, Commander. I think we’re already at max doghouse. This won’t add anything.”

Commander Hobart gave me a nod, then turned away and began giving orders to Miller. I took that as my cue and headed for the exit.

I normally kept this manny at the Newholme capitol, a convenient location for interacting with the government or catching transit if I needed to go into town. However, knowing how this engagement might end, I’d decided to plan for getting the manny off-planet. Howard had warned me that the very human tendency to want a scapegoat was making life uncomfortable for in-system Bobs everywhere.

My assets, those that were liquid anyway, had already been transferred via inter-system banking, in transactions that couldn’t be unwound. My physical assets were already heading out to the Oort by various paths. Once I reached my base there, I could work out my next step.

As soon as I stepped out of the building, one of my cargo drones landed in front of me. Without breaking stride, I loaded myself in and ordered the drone to take off. I figured I had half an hour at the most before the government—the Big Heads, as local slang called them—confiscated or nationalized (or whatever euphemism you used for grabbed) my assets.

It was funny, but ever since the war of independence on Poseidon, there’d been an unspoken agreement in the Bobiverse to not publish or otherwise publicize the existence of or plans for SUDDAR cloaking. I guess the mutual distrust had already been sown before Starfleet started inflating it. Or maybe their attitude was born of that distrust.

The bottom line, though, was that once I got my equipment off-planet, they had no chance of finding it.



It turned out I’d been a bit of a pessimist. It took almost three hours before an executive order was issued to “secure” all Bobiverse in-system assets, pending any assignment of legal liability. The order came with instructions for immediate action by the military and financial sector. It would take the suits most of a day to unwind the various blinds and dummy corps I’d set up in the last couple of days, at which point they’d find nothing but lint.

The military aspect was a more immediate concern. Two squadrons pulled away from the Lagrange naval bases, accelerating at military-level G’s for my last known position and vector. Unfortunately for them, I’d already changed direction several times, so I was not only not at the projected position, I also didn’t have a vector that was radial to it. Space was alive with SUDDAR pings, all sliding silently past my cloak.

It took only a minute for Commander Hobart to come online. “Claude Johansson, you are under military arrest, per executive order of the Big—er, of the Newholme Council. Cease acceleration and surrender yourself for boarding.”

I spared a moment to chuckle at Hobart’s almost faux pas. But of course, to respond would be to show my position. The commander was doomed to a frustrating day of explaining to the Big Heads why he’d come up empty-handed.

I formatted an email and fired it off to Bill, via my own SCUT-enabled relay. Not that he needed more headaches, but this was part of the big picture, and would probably be replicated in other systems.

I received a reply within seconds. No, not mils. Seconds. He was that busy.

Thanks for the info, Claude. Sadly, you’re probably right about other systems trying the same thing. But I’ll give any potentially affected Bobs the heads-up. Nice move with the financial assets, by the way.

I smiled, then sat back and stared into space. One way or another, I was probably finished in this system. Even if they decided they didn’t need to sue me, I’d have a hard time arguing that I hadn’t heard the commander, and that all my chess moves were just normal business.

Well, what the hell. I’d been stationary too long. Mario and his crew were finding interesting things out beyond the Others’ system. Maybe I’d join up and do my part to make known space a bigger place.





8. The Search

Bob

July 2334

Cedar Rapids

Hugh had cleaned up the spare manny and was on the road. I was glad to have him active in Heaven’s River. The thing with cloning versus transporting and the whole soul business was, I admit, freaky. I wondered if he’d decided to transport to Eta Leporis just to test it out for himself.

I was in town, having arrived by land. A few casual conversations revealed that I was in a location that the translator handed off as Cedar Rapids. Local tree, of course.

It was a prosperous town, with a relatively large fleet of ships. It appeared that being the closest port to the mountains, and therefore the choke point for all goods coming from and going to the next segment of Heaven’s River, was a good thing.

There was another festival in full swing. I decided to wander around a little, see the sights, and get some of the flavor of the place. Hopefully without my friends around, I would be just one more face in the crowd.

And I would make a point of not peeking into any carts.

In rapid succession, I saw a square dance group, a terrific string quartet, and a vocal group. The Quinlans definitely had a good sense of music and rhythm. But nothing was going to compensate for those short limbs. They would never do ballet. Or even hip-hop.

I decided it might be prudent to check for signs of the Resistance. I had come in overland and hadn’t gone anywhere near the docks, so presumably I’d bypassed any lookouts. As casually as any random Quinlan, I picked the closest tavern and got a table. This one was significantly upscale, having an actual outdoor patio where one could eat, drink, and watch the world go by. However, a few minutes of watching made it clear that people seated there were not interested in socializing. So indoors it would be.

I sidled up to the bar and ordered a beer and the local equivalent of a sandwich. It wasn’t actual bread, maybe more of a pita wrap, but it had variations that didn’t involve fish in its many forms. That alone made it my favorite snack.

In between bites, I started to talk up the barkeep. It was a slow day, so she was bored enough to put up with me.

“Good lady, I am between residences at the moment. Could you recommend me a hotel or apartment overlooking the docks?”

“Why in Mother’s name would you want to live near the docks?”

Um, think fast, Bob. “I’m an artist. Ships are my current subject of choice.”

She cocked her head, then nodded, deciding I wasn’t dangerous. Or suspicious. Or something.

“My cousin Maurice is landlord of the Oaken Bale luxury apartments. Tell him Melanie sent you and he’ll find you something to your liking.”

And give you a kickback, no doubt. It was amazing just how much business was done in Heaven’s River based on who knew a guy. But that was fine. It gave Melanie some motivation to help me out and to rationalize away any oddness.

She gave me directions and I thanked her and ordered another beer just to be neighborly.



I was going to play it cagey this time around, so I decided not to ask too many questions at any one location. Moving on to another tavern, I engaged a random barfly in conversation.

“Say, I’ve got a cousin who is staying at the Oaken Bale apartments. I haven’t been able to find it. Can you help me out?”

Marty McBarfly chuckled. “You must have been watching the ladies when you got here, my friend. You would have walked right by it as you left the docks.” He examined me up and down speculatively. “Your cousin must be from the more affluent side of the family. The Oaken Bale is not cheap.”

I laughed and tried to look embarrassed. I had a cover story ready, and as cover stories went, it wasn’t bad. “Gramps is hoping Theodore can find me a spot with some future prospects. Things are slow in Halep’s Ending.” I watched him closely to see if the name meant anything. No luck. “Theodore works at the library, not that he needs the money. I could probably meet him there.”

“Which one? Ayelands or Meat Hook?”

Oops. “Uh, I confess I didn’t pay that much attention. It’s the one closest to his home, though. He hates walking.”

“Ayelands, then.” He gave me directions. “I hope it works out well for you.” Marty looked woefully at his empty mug. Taking the hint, I signaled for another round, and Marty’s mood picked up.

I had no intention of actually showing up at the library, any more than I intended to walk jauntily along the docks wearing a monocle, swinging my walking stick, and whistling Dixie. I needed to know if the Resistance was still after me. If they had this town covered as well, then I had to accept that I was always going to be on their radar.

I took a place in the Oaken Bale, and it really was expensive. I calculated that I’d burn through my cash in three months. Not that I planned to be here that long, but it was still worrying. If I had to, I could sell the knives, but I had a feeling that I wouldn’t be able to get retail for them.



After another long day of what I supposed could be considered spying, I popped into my VR library to find Hugh sitting back and drinking a coffee. He raised the cup in salute as I plopped into my La-Z-Boy.

“How goes the battle, O great ancestor?”

I snickered in response, but I felt the ol’ spidey sense tingle. Hugh’s occasional attempts at bonhomie never really rang true. It wasn’t an Original Bob behavior, and the Skippies didn’t strike me as having drifted into the glad-handing used-car-salesman domain. In movie terms, it was like he was leaning against the furniture and whistling while examining the ceiling. The question was, why?

“I’ve been watching the docks for several days,” I replied. “There are a couple of guys who appear to spell each other, and they don’t have an obvious function other than holding up walls. But that doesn’t make them Resistance. And if they are, they’re not trying very hard.”

“Probably just a general directive all the way up and down the segment to watch out for us. Well, you.”

“Maybe. What are you doing?”

Hugh pointed his finger at his chest. “I am now a deckhand working a trading vessel that circuits the entire segment, using all four main river systems. At the moment, we’re working our way down the Arcadia River.”

“Huh.” That actually wasn’t a terrible idea. He’d blend in with the crew, he’d have a lot of opportunity to talk and listen, and he’d be in a new town pretty much every day.

“Oh, and Bob …”

I recognized the tone of trouble. I cocked my head, trying to look as innocent as possible.

“I wonder if you could clarify something for me. It took a couple of days of my crewmates chortling every time they addressed me before I consciously listened to the Quinlan translation of my name.”

Innocent. Straight face. I know nothing. “Well, of course the translation routine randomly assigns Quinlan names as required and associates them with a given English name.”

“Random.”

“Yup.”

He paused again. “So the translator randomly and completely by coincidence assigned me the name Beer Can.”

“Uh, yeah, pretty much.”

He stared at me, and I stared back, holding the straight face as long as I could. Finally, I broke. I started laughing and couldn’t stop. “Well … Skippy … you …” I could only squeeze out the occasional word between the guffaws. After a few moments, Hugh grinned, then started to laugh himself.

“Okay,” he finally said, “it was funny. Nicely done. But you do realize this means war?”

I grinned back at him. “I guess you’re stuck with it, though.”

“Yep. But I explained to my mates that it was a nickname, originally meant as a joke but that ended up sticking.”

I nodded in appreciation of the quick thinking. “Have you learned anything in your travels, though?”

“Nothing momentous. There’s a general awareness of the existence of the Administrator and the Resistance, at least in the broadest terms. Many Quinlans are aware that they’re living in an artificial megastructure, and that they’re being held at a specific technological level. For others, it’s become somewhat mythologized, involving deities and demons and such. Either way, they mostly don’t care.”

“Really?”

“Yeah, the thing is, life is pretty good. No one starves, there are no wars—maybe the occasional inter-city skirmish over fishing territory, but that’s about it. Medical knowledge is good, and sanitation is well understood, so mortality is low. The truly huge predators that used to eat Quinlans are kept very low in numbers. Most people die from incurable illnesses, old age, fights, or other misadventures. It would be hard to come up with a good argument that would convince the average Quinlan to get worked up about the situation.” Hugh looked like he was about to say more, then cut himself off.

This just reinforced my growing suspicion that Hugh was holding out on me in some way. But whether it was significant, or just some wacko theory that he wasn’t ready to share …

“Okay,” I said, “I’ve about exhausted my options in Cedar Rapids. No one has heard of Halep’s Ending, and unless I march through town carrying a sign announcing myself, I don’t think I’m going to have any kind of run-in with either the Resistance or the Administrator. There’s a transit station a little way downriver, so I think I’m going to go there and try to break in.”

“You’re turning into a real juvenile delinquent,” Hugh said with a grin. “Well, have fun.”





9. A Declaration of War

Will

July 2334

UFS Council Session

I was touring one of the new experimental open-air towns on Valhalla when I got a message on my heads-up. The UFS had just called an emergency session. That would have been significant news at any time, but right now with the Starfleet issue, it almost certainly meant trouble.

The bios would take time to get to communicators, so I didn’t feel the need to seat my manny on the nearest surface and leave it. Instead, I turned up the horses and sprinted to a green space where I could find a bench to plant my butt on.

Within minutes, the manny was seated in an Adirondack chair and I was in virt, waiting for the session to start. While I waited, I read the prepared statement from the Pangean Council.

At 8:30 yesterday, standard time, the Pangea Navy engaged with devices controlled by a faction of the Bobiverse commonly referred to disparagingly as Starfleet. These devices were illegally cordoning our communications station, with a stated intent of using it as a bargaining chip for extortion against our government. Our forces carried the battle, but the enemy, possibly in a fit of pique, destroyed the hostaged systems.

In addition, our attempts to recover control of the Pangea system autofactories were met with the same response.

We are now in the precarious situation of having lost half our manufacturing capability and virtually all our communications with the rest of the UFS. There is no acceptable justification for these actions. Accordingly, the Pangean Council has declared war against the group known as Starfleet. To the extent possible, all Starfleet assets will be identified and confiscated. Commerce or communication with Starfleet operatives by Pangea citizens will be considered illegal and will be punishable under the War Measures Act.

The missive went on for several more paragraphs, but didn’t add much to the central takeaway: Pangea was officially at war.

I pulled up some background documents to get details. The colony had tried to access the comms station and do a manual reset, and it had self-destructed. No one was killed, but there was significant damage to a couple of ships. The administration had then tried to do the same with their one Lagrange-based autofactory and had been set upon by mining drones and roamers. Except for the order of the explosions, it was a virtual repeat of the Newholme engagement.

This was not good. Never mind the obvious issues, Starfleet had endangered human lives by blowing up stations. Even if they hadn’t actively pushed the button, just booby-trapping them like that made Starfleet culpable. In their rush to sever ties with bios, they’d undertaken strategies that were just making the bios mad and ensuring more interaction. And not the good kind.

These guys were really idiots. I mean seriously common sense–challenged.

A ding indicated that the session was about to start. I set the data window aside and paid attention. The Chair took the floor and proceeded to read the prepared statement verbatim. No new info there, and I began to squirm with impatience.

Finally, the Chair ran down, having contributed nothing that I could detect, and ceded the floor to the representative from Pangea.

Representative Hee stood and glared around. It was showmanship, of course. He was facing a video window, the same as the rest of us. But it was well executed. You felt you’d just been examined, judged, and dismissed.

“I won’t belabor the events described in the Pangean statement,” he began. “Suffice it to say, blowing up Pangean property and placing the lives of our citizens in danger is a de facto act of war.”

Hee paused for effect. “We accept the explanation from the Bobiverse about the splinter group known as Starfleet. I will leave for another day the question of whether this is symptomatic of a more general and long-term issue of risk in continuing to have diplomatic and economic relations with what is essentially a separate species—a non-biological species at that. One whose capabilities and ultimate goals are not known.”

Uh-oh. He wasn’t just going after Starfleet.

“We have, to this point, been unable to reacquire control of the L5 spaceyards. Since the strategic situation can only deteriorate as the enemy consolidates their position, we have decided to take early and decisive action. As I speak, a number of tactical nuclear devices have been deployed. By the time we are finished with this discussion, the Pangean spaceyard autofactory will be no more.”

Representative Hee paused to do the sweeping-glare thing again. “Doubtless it will have occurred to everyone that this loss, and the loss of our primary commercial autofactory yesterday, will affect our economic outlook. Let me assure you that we have planet-based resources sufficient to replace the space-born assets within a local year.” He now stared straight into the camera, an action that felt like it was directed at me. “However, we will not forget this event, and there will be consequences.”

A few more representatives gave speeches just because they felt they had to, then the council held a vote to support Pangea’s use of nukes. It passed.

The situation at Newholme had been a major topic of discussion in the Bobiverse for several solid minutes. This, on top of what had already gone down, meant we were at real risk. Financially, that is. Bobs hadn’t been inclined to leave themselves physically vulnerable since the Mat War on Poseidon. A fair number of in-system Heaven vessels were actually decoys nowadays, while Bobs parked themselves way the hell out in the Oort.

Howard had volunteered to shelter such assets as could be transferred to him. He had a lot of connections and a huge business empire, and owned large swatches of meatspace—more than the bios realized. A frontal assault would not go well for them.

Finally, the session wound down. With a sigh, I disconnected. My little “side project” was beginning to look less and less like a casual bit of vanity and more like a potential endgame. It might be time to talk to Neil and Herschel.





10. Catching the Train

Bob

July 2334

Transit

I examined the station using telescopic vision. In outward appearance, it was identical to the one outside Garack’s Spine. Probably the artwork would be different, but from this distance I couldn’t see the interior.

I had a decision to make. If Crew—and any Resistance double agents—used the vacuum monorail, it stood to reason they had to be able to get into the transit station. If they could get in, but the riffraff couldn’t, they needed some way to identify themselves. I fingered the security pass in my hand. It was all very logical, but even in a human-built environment it wouldn’t be a sure thing. Or I could be right with my logic, but this card might not be for transit. Trying to get into the station using a library card would surely be unsuccessful. And probably get me noticed.

And what about facial recognition? Had they implemented a matching system? Would the systems compare my mug with a picture on file, which was probably Natasha’s? If so, and I failed the match—which I would—what would happen? Legions of crab-like drones assaulting me? Air horns?

On the other hand, my alternative was to dig my way into the station the same way Gandalf and co. had dug out. But with only one-inch roamers, that could take a while. I decided I’d save that option for last.

I compared my face with Natasha’s in my memory, then for completeness, compared some other random Quinlan faces. Facial recognition software, at least the Terran version, didn’t do a full “recognition” the way a person would. The computer match was done by comparing the spatial relation between significant and easily recognizable points on the face, like pupils, ends of the mouth, nostrils, point of the chin, and so forth. This simplified algorithm saved a lot of processing time and was good enough for most purposes.

A brief survey of my memories of Quinlans identified a similar set of likely key locations on the Quinlan face. How much flexibility did my manny have in that area? They were built using the same skeletal and muscular design as the biological versions, but the mannies also had internal repair systems that could be ordered around. Plus, muscles could be flexed in unnatural ways, if necessary.

I remembered Will’s comment that once the Administration had a mug shot of me, I’d never be off their radar. Maybe, just for safety, I should take the time to look into this.

I sent a quick message to Bill, and received a reply almost immediately. “Really busy, Bob. Check with the Borg if you need a quick answer.”

Hmmph. Definitely not what I was looking for. Nevertheless, I forwarded the message to Locutus and received a response within a minute. “The design came with editable parameters. Some are fixed at print time, but some are what I suppose we could call mechanical settings. You should have a certain level of adjustability. I’ve attached specs and instructions.”

Much better. I read the instructions, reviewed my requirements, and sent orders to internal systems. I could feel my face contorting—it wasn’t painful, but it felt like something was crawling under my skin and made me want to dance around, yelling, Gahhhhh!

In seconds, it was done. I spit up a spider to take a selfie with.

Hmm. Not perfect, but very likely within the margins of error.

I took a figurative deep breath, stood, and marched toward the front door of the transit station, trying to look like I belonged there.



The main entranceway, a roll-up door of barn size, didn’t present me with any obvious manner of getting in. I was probably on camera by this point, but I doubted that standing and staring was considered a crime.

Just off around the side, though, was a normal-sized door, probably for maintenance people or whatever. And, glory be, this entrance had one of those flat plates beside it for scanning security cards. It continued to amaze me how totally plebian and boringly similar most tech turned out to be.

The moment of truth. I placed the card against the plate and deliberately avoided looking around. There was a click, and I pulled the door open. Success! And no crab hordes.

I was going to have to wing it a little bit, as I’d be going where no Bob had gone before, but presumably my every step wasn’t being monitored. I walked up to the elevators, pressed the only button, and a door opened with a ding. I entered and pressed the button labelled Transit.

After a short ride, the doors opened on a corridor stretching off into the distance. This had very much a public-area kind of feeling, and my confidence increased as I progressed. At the end of the corridor, the space opened up to some kind of vestibule or maybe train platform. Along the far wall were a series of evenly spaced, identical doors, looking something like airlocks. Between each set of doors was a card reader panel. At a loss as to what else to do, I pressed Natasha’s card against one. A voice spoke into my ear. “Destination?”

Okay, moment of truth. “Halep’s Ending?”

“One moment.” A short pause. “A train will arrive in 168 seconds.”

Holy moly, jackpot! A hundred and sixty-eight seconds was the English translation. The actual amount quoted was one and a half veks, the Quinlan equivalent to minutes. Gotta love translators.

But the important takeaway was that Halep’s Ending existed, it was on the route listings, and I was going there. For the first time since this adventure started, I felt Bender was actually within reach.





11. The War in Meatspace

Will

July 2334

UFS Council Session

I read the message in my heads-up twice, hoping that I’d misunderstood. Nope. The Romulus WorldGov had just preemptively nuked the local space-based autofactories. I supposed, after the Newholme and Pangea experiences, they kind of had a point.

I sighed and ordered the roamers to begin cleaning up my work area. I wasn’t going to be getting more work done on this water filter design anytime soon. The roamers would take care of putting everything away, so I walked over to a convenient Adirondack chair and made myself comfortable, then exited my manny.

I immediately connected to the UFS council channel and signed in. As expected, discussion of the nuking was in process at full volume. Representative Ella Cranston, the granddaughter of my old nemesis, had the floor.

“… And no, we will not be compensating the Bobiverse for the loss of their assets. Let’s not forget where the threat is coming from. In fact, if this becomes an ongoing issue, I will move to demand compensation from the Bobiverse for our losses, both equipment and productivity. We’ve lost billions because of the economic volatility, never mind direct costs. At this time, we are negotiating with our neighbors on Vulcan to pass legislation mandating only human-owned-and-operated autofactories in the Omicron2 Eridani system …”

She went on for considerable time, but the upshot was that all Bobiverse equipment in their system would be deactivated or nuked forthwith. They would be replacing the relay station with their own unit, which we were welcome to use as paying customers, just like everyone else.

Well, that was something. The Pangea colony was talking about cutting us off completely and treating us like an untrusted foreign power. To be fair, they’d had the worst experience with Starfleet’s strategies, so I couldn’t blame them.

A ding indicated a private conference request. It was from Representative Ben Hendricks, one of our descendants. That alone made him one of my favorite people. The fact that he was conscientious, ethical, and dedicated was just a bonus.

I pressed accept and his face came up. “Will, the agreement with Vulcan will almost certainly go through. The Bobs are going to be all but tossed out of the system. Is there anything we can do?”

“It’s not that bad, Ben.” I made a calm down motion with my hand. “The Bobiverse is the single biggest user of the relay stations, since everything we do is via SCUT. OmiComms LLC will no doubt be taking over completely in Omicron2 Eridani, and they’ll want to keep us as a customer, whatever the government mouthpieces are threatening. Plus, we’re a major shareholder, so we could force the issue.”

Ben smiled and nodded. As the owners of the communications and production systems for many years, the Bobiverse had accumulated huge wealth in the human economy, almost without trying. It was quite possible, in fact, that resentment of that fact was fueling at least some of the glee with which the humans were dismantling things.

“My real concern,” I continued, “is the talk of restricting manny use. It’s pointless, as we’d still be able to do business by video call, but it would socially isolate us. I’ve got our lawyers working the human rights angle—”

“And the government is contesting your right to be considered human,” Ben replied.

“Yeah. FAITH all over again, even if they aren’t calling themselves that anymore.” I frowned. “I don’t think they can win that, Ben. Unless they just start ignoring laws and daring us to do anything about it. I think that would take us and them down a road I don’t want to speculate on.”

Ben nodded. “Uh-huh. It would be a constitutional crisis, at minimum.”

I brought up the volume on Cranston’s rant for a moment, then turned it down and smiled. “Looks like her signal-to-noise ratio has dropped to zero. I’m going to keep a low profile on this, unless she and her allies go off the deep end. Keep me updated, okay?”

Ben nodded again and gave me a wave. I closed the conference, signed off the council session, and sat back.

It wasn’t likely that any colony government would be able to ban mannies outright. Lobbyist groups representing the replicant preserve companies, along with rich people who had signed up for replication, would bring a lot of pressure to bear. But the pattern was worrying. Replicant resentment plus Starfleet war plus Pav threat plus all the rumors circulating about the Quinlans were proving to be too much for the average human citizen. With too many threats from too many directions, Joe Average wanted to circle the wagons.

We’d spent a hundred years setting up a single galactic government that would provide some safety and stability for all sentients, and now it was unravelling. Ugh. As if I needed reminding of why I hated politics.





12. Halep’s Ending

Bob

July 2334

Heaven’s River

There was a subtle vibration through the floor, followed a few moments later by one set of doors opening.

“The train for Halep’s Ending has arrived,” the voice said in my ear. “The train will be leaving in one hundred twelve seconds.”

I walked through the open doorway. A short airlock section ended in another set of doors, which opened into what was presumably my train. Certainly it had that long, tubelike train shape. There were no windows, but there were rows of comfortable-looking seats. I glanced over my shoulder and realized that the row of doors at the end of the platform connected to matching doors on the train, with two sets of doors leading into each car. Very much like a subway. All in all, it seemed very civilized. I studied the area at the back of the car and realized it held a washroom (the same sign on the door was used in every town in Heaven’s River) and a small vendor kiosk. There was a sign on the shuttered window that said, The snack bar is closed until further notice.

I was staring at the sign in a state of slightly disbelieving amusement when the train voice said, “Please be seated. Doors will close in eleven seconds. Acceleration will last three hundred thirty-six seconds. After that point, passengers may move around the train.”

I took the nearest seat and settled back. It was comfortable and included accommodation for the Quinlan tail. There were some controls on the armrest and speakers in the headrest. Quinlans travelled in style. But in principle, a passenger might have to travel up to a half-billion miles in Heaven’s River. How would that work?

“Excuse me, train voice?”

“May I be of assistance?”

“How long to Halep’s Ending?”

“Three-thousand eight-hundred fourteen miles.”

“No—” Okay, granted I’d phrased that wrong. “How much time will this trip to Halep’s Ending take?”

“Approximately six-thousand two-hundred forty-four seconds, including acceleration and deceleration.”

About twenty-two hundred miles per hour. At that speed, it would take a lifetime to travel around the topopolis.

“What is the longest trip one could take, in terms of distance?”

“The edge of the observable universe is approximately forty-five-point-seven billion light-years away.”

Sigh. “What is the longest trip one could take on the Heaven’s River train system, in terms of distance?”

“A trip to Grendel, which is opposite this point on Heaven’s River, would be approximately four-hundred-ninety-nine million, seven-hundred-and-twenty-thousand miles.”

“How long would that trip take on this train?”

“You would not take that trip on this train.”

Grrrrr. “How would I take that trip?”

“You would take an express train equipped with staterooms and sleeping berths.”

“And how long would the trip take?”

“Approximately twelve days.”

“The express trains travel faster?”

“Express trains travel on the high-speed trunks and achieve a maximum velocity of five-hundred twenty-seven miles per second.”

Interestingly precise speed. I did a quick calculation and realized that such a speed would result in one standard Quinlan G of pseudo-gravity as the train travelled around the topopolis. Except the train would also be corkscrewing counter to the rotation of the habitat, which explained the helical track that Professor Gilligan had described.

Anyway, at the moment I was on a local run, which would operate at much lower speeds. Well, I had a couple of hours with nothing to do. “Which direction is Halep’s Ending?”

“It is in front of us.”

I bit back an expletive. “Which direction is Halep’s Ending relative to Garack’s Spine?”

“It is sunward.”

I had to think about that for a moment, and check the translation specs. Sunward meant the direction that the artificial sun moved, so west according to our conventions.

“Can you tell me about the area around Halep’s Ending?”

“Specifics are not available. There is an information kiosk at the station that can provide local details.”

Uh-huh. Except it was probably closed. Until further notice. Sadly, the train voice probably only had information directly related to trains and train schedules. And asking all kinds of weird questions might get me flagged.

“Can you inform me when we’re close to arrival?”

“I will set a wake-up call for two-hundred twenty-four seconds before deceleration. Is that acceptable?”

“Uh, yes. Thank you.”

Meanwhile, I would put the manny on standby and have a “nap,” which would allow me to get some work done.



“They really had this stuff all worked out, didn’t they?” Will said. “Steven pointed out the helical layout of the express tubes. He even suggested why they exist. The helical track exactly cancels out the rotation of the megastructure as the train travels through it. And the speed of the train around the long radius is calibrated to replace the lost artificial gravity of the shell rotation. Nice.”

I grinned at Will’s reaction. That response was one I’d normally expect more from Bill. But as always, Bob is Bob. “Yup. So I’ll be at Halep’s Ending soon, and I’ll head for the nearest mountains. If the segments are reasonably standardized, and there’s no reason to think otherwise, the entrance shouldn’t be too hard to find.”

“The question, though, is whether Natasha’s pass-card will work four thousand miles away.”

“And whether I dare try it and risk alarms going off.”

We were interrupted by the train voice, playing into my VR through the manny link. “We are approaching your destination.”

Will levered himself out of the beanbag chair. “I guess that’s your curtain call.” He waved and popped out.

I entered the manny and blinked my eyes, feigning waking up. “Thank you. Is there anyone else on the train?”

“Not at this time.”

“What does the train do if there are no passengers requiring transport?”

“The train will remain at the last stop until called.”

Interesting. So unless someone in Halep’s Ending needs a train, I might have a getaway vehicle waiting for me.

My ruminations were interrupted as my seat began to rotate in place. I glanced around to see that all the seats were doing the same. It answered a question that had been in the back of my mind about how deceleration would be handled.

I wondered what acceleration and deceleration would be like in one of the express trains. Probably a lot longer. It seemed likely that they had acceleration couches separate from the berths and staterooms.

The train came to a stop and the doors swooshed open. The train voice said, “May you travel with Mother’s blessing.”

I didn’t know what the proper response was, so I just said, “Thank you.”

This station was identical to the last one, so leaving was almost like playing the video in reverse. Except, as expected, the art was different. And naturally my mind went there. A billion miles of topopolis is a hundred million transit stations—no, scratch that, four hundred million, if they followed each of the four rivers. Either the Quinlans produced a lot of art, or there would be duplications. I wondered for a moment if there was an art mill somewhere, with Quinlans churning out statues and paintings.

I headed for the same side door, which only required pushing on a latch bar from this side. And just like that, I was out in the weather.

Specifically, it was raining. Not a lashing, raging storm. We hadn’t seen any of that kind of out-of-control, cage-match stuff the whole time we’d been here. My theory was that it would cause undue erosion and therefore extra work for the maintenance critters. And anyway, I figured weather in an artificial environment would tend to be mild, predictable, and controlled.

Still, I was getting rained on, which wouldn’t bother a Quinlan but irked my human-raised brain. And I wouldn’t be able to smell a stream in this mess. Sulking loudly, I marched off toward the town in the near distance.

It was interesting that all the transit stations were outside of towns. And it wasn’t like the towns or the stations had been moved. The towns were on the best possible spot on the river, so that was doubtless where they were supposed to be. The stations … well, how would you move them?

Perhaps this was a Quinlan psychological thing. They couldn’t be like humans in everything. Maybe they didn’t like transit stations up in their face or something. It was just one of many, many questions that we were accumulating, and might or might not get answers to, someday.

It was very late in the day and was beginning to get dark. I probably wasn’t in danger from the local wildlife, but I would have to stop moving if I wanted to avoid their attentions. A bed in town sounded best. I dropped to all fours and put on some speed.



Renting a room was an experience. I was beginning to get a hint of why Bridget had decided on a sabbat as our cover. Sabbats were common, and there was a whole section of the economy dedicated to servicing that particular market segment. Single travelers, though, not so much. I had to try three hotels before I found a vacancy.

I’d tweaked my features slightly, preferring to mix it up rather than constantly walk around with the same face.

I was up early the next morning. Not bothering with breakfast or the accompanying breakfast beer (yech!), I headed straight for the river. The mountains were only a few miles away, and swimming would get me there much faster than a land approach.

I decided to deliberately overshoot the estimated location of the entrance, preferring to approach it from behind in case there were surveillance cameras. Again, I had to assume that the habitat had been set up with normal levels of civilian security in mind, rather than a military defensive strategy. Cameras would probably be limited to surveilling the road up to the gate.

Assuming I wasn’t all wet with my deductions, then the habitat would have been originally designed not to hide the entrance from the populace, but to hide it from view—to maintain the illusion. Also, the entrance wouldn’t be too hard to get to for staff. That would put it as close as possible to the river, consistent with the rising land providing space for an underground maintenance complex, because Quinlans.

It would also almost certainly have at least some kind of basic security, so I wouldn’t be able to just walk up and turn the handle. But that’s what roamers were for, right?

I swam upstream until I was at the point where arable land ended and pseudo-rock started. Up close, I could tell the material of the mountains was clearly not natural rock. In fact, it had somewhat the consistency of volcanic pumice, probably an engineered version. And probably lightweight, since that would matter in the rotating shell. The coloration was artificial and designed to resemble random terrain from a distance.

Then I floated slowly downstream, hugging the shore, examining the rock, looking for … something. And lo and behold, I found something.

Pumice is hard, but it’s light because it’s mostly air bubbles. And it wears. I don’t know how many generations of Quinlans had been using this particular path to the water, but it was enough to have worn it smooth. I grinned to myself and climbed out of the water. Success!

Well, probably success. One additional concern would be whether or not the Resistance had set up surveillance of the entrance. They might or might not allocate someone to the task. They might or might not use electronic means. Of course, too much of that might tip off the Administrator, so they might stay as low-tech as possible.

In my mind, Vizzini started gibbering. I was going around in circles again. “Inconceivable,” I muttered. At some point you had to pick.

I decided on boldness. I spit out all my spiders and directed them to examine the area around and in front of me as I advanced. Within a minute, the trail terminated at a blank wall, no cameras in evidence. I thought of the Mines of Moria and muttered “friend,” with a grin. No effect, of course. Tolkien had no power here.

Roamers did, though. I ordered the spiders to do a close-in survey and released my fleas as well. My devices would find everything there was to be found, and meanwhile I would get some sun.



It was late afternoon and the sun was disappearing behind the mountains, creating a premature local dusk, when one of my fleas reported a find. A small design glitch had caused a stress fracture where the pumice layer was only an inch or so deep over the underlying structure. The flea had found a ventilation tube and was asking permission to cut into it.

I granted permission and sent the other fleas in to help.

The thing about security doors is that, no matter how much electronics you add, in the end there’s a latch connected to a mechanical linkage actuated by a magnet or motor, powered by electricity, which is controlled by a switch. And the roamer design included the capability to act as a conductor if necessary, without frying the unit. Very handy for circuit testing and repair. And for espionage, as it turns out.

My devices also found a sensor that would report the opening and closing of the door. That was a simple fix. One of the fleas jammed the sensor for the duration by simply welding the moving part.

The door opened.

However, without the sensor operating, the lights didn’t come on, so I was looking at a dim corridor which would turn pitch black once the door closed. Infrared vision would help some, but I’d still have to go slow. As soon as I started walking, though, lights came on. Motion sensors. Hopefully all they did was control the lighting. With a sigh, I accepted that I simply wasn’t going to be able to plan for and control everything. As usual, winging it would form a large percentage of my strategy.

I instructed my spiders to precede me down the corridor, walking along the walls and ceiling, and to warn me of upcoming booby traps, cameras, trip wires, acid pits, hordes of goblins and/or orcs, or pretty much anything not suitable for afternoon tea.

The corridor led to an elevator bank. Of course it did. Because nothing says “stealth” like taking the elevator down to the secret lair. Ding. Fourth floor: Evil geniuses, minions, laser weapons, and submarine platforms. Please watch your step.

On the other hand, this wasn’t a secret lair, at least not in the James Bond way. Security would be more corporate than military, relying more on access cards and sensors than guards and guns. This structure would have been built according to government specs, or building codes, or whatever it was that the Quinlans had. The building Bridget and I had investigated on Quin had an emergency staircase. Betcha this place did, too.

And, yes, there it was. But it was locked. I didn’t feel like forcing it, and in fact might not be able to. The construction seemed a little more solid than my previous experience, and it was probably alarmed. In went the fleas, and a few seconds later the alarm sensor was jammed and the door sprung open. I couldn’t leave it unlatched like that, but I could instruct the fleas to permanently disable the locking mechanism.

The emergency staircase was perma-lit, as such structures always are. The sociological and behavioral parallels between totally unrelated civilizations was a never-ending source of amazement to me. I wished for a moment we could find a couple more technological species so we’d have more samples to compare.

Which was all very interesting, but maybe I should concentrate on sneaking into the evil lair for now.

I took a moment to format a report and send it off to the group. It would hopefully help Hugh to zero in on the entrance if and when he got near the mountains.

I got to the next level down and sent a flea under the door for a quick peek. No one around. Excellent. Opening the door as quietly as possible, I stuck my head out and peered around, then stepped through.

From here on, there was no point in sneaking around. Nothing says intruder like acting furtive. Nope. I belonged here. In fact, I owned the place. I stood tall, stuck my chest out, and strutted down the hall with a bounce in my step, my spiders and fleas hurriedly hopping on board.

The place had a lived-in feel. The air wasn’t stale or musty, no dust, the lights were all functioning, everything was neatly in its place. That could just be good automated systems, but if that was the case, I was back to square one.

Bad news: This installation was probably huge, as it would serve many purposes relating to the care and maintenance of Heaven’s River. And the Resistance would probably be using a very small part of it.

Or maybe not. I might be about to go off on another Vizzini rant, but the Quinlans had good automation, as evinced by their outer space cleanup crews. Chances were that maintenance of Heaven’s River would be mostly automated as well. Otherwise the Administrator would have to let too many people into the inner circle. I couldn’t see a secret ruling cabal composed of hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of janitors and plumbers working for long, let alone for generations. No, most of this installation would be related to Automation, Storage for and Maintenance of. The Quinlan-friendly areas would be few, mostly intended for supervisory purposes, and mostly near the elevators. That was the way humans would have done it, and I was pretty confident by this point that Quinlans and humans were very similar in a lot of ways.

I stopped and waited, but Vizzini didn’t seem inclined to offer up a counterpoint. Good.

And as it turned out, my neurotic arguments with myself were a good thing, because as I was standing there waiting for a counterargument, I heard a noise. Not much of one, in fact I couldn’t say exactly what I’d heard, even when I played it back.

It could be nothing. Or it could be people. I voted for people.



The fleas and spiders were getting a lot of use, and I was aware that some of them required some maintenance downtime. I might need all hands on deck if things got tense, so I swallowed all but one spider, who was still in good shape, and instructed it to move ahead of me and peek around corners. I still picked up the occasional noise, which was beginning to sound more like Quinlan voices as I zeroed in on the source.

“Hey, Bob, you got a sec?”

I almost jumped out of my fur. If there’d been a cybernetic version of a heart attack, I’d be having one.

“Not right now, Bill. I’m kinda busy sneaking into Dr. Evil’s hideout.”

“Oh, okay. Call me back when you have time.”

“Will do.”

I terminated the call, swallowed my metaphorical heart, and resumed following the spider. At the next corner, the voices abruptly became much clearer, and I could now hear occasional furniture noises—feet scraping on the floor, things banging together, stuff like that. I was probably very close. I didn’t want to rush in and stab everyone, and depending on numbers, I might not be able to—

“Hi, Bob. Where are you right now?”

Un-fucking-believable. I’d been dead for three hundred years and I was still getting phone calls. I gritted my teeth and took a calming breath before replying. “Hey, Hugh, I’m a little busy right now. Can I call you back?”

“Sure thing.”

I hung up—again—and searched for a Do Not Disturb button. And found one, of course. No Bob would design a comms system without one. I wondered why I’d failed to pick up on that before.

The spider went around the final corner and peeked through the door. The video feed showed four Quinlans sitting around a table, shuffling paper. By which I mean some were reading, some were writing, but everyone had paper and pens. It was almost homey in a way. I wondered about the low-tech process, but then maybe they were worried about the security of electronic systems. I had no way of knowing how far the Administrator’s reach really was.

Conversations were unhurried and mixed with long silences. The attendees didn’t appear to be depressed or anything. Just concentrating. It mostly consisted of remarks about segment numbers and member statuses and activities. I listened for a few moments, then decided I should find a place to hide. Surveillance seemed like a good idea, and that would be up the spout if one of them walked out and found me standing there.

I sent a freshly refurbished spider out to replace my current observer, then I went looking, as quietly as possible, for a hiding place.



I was in an office just around the corner, curled up under a desk. It wasn’t original or particularly imaginative, but it was good enough to hide me from anything short of a concerted search, and that would happen only if I screwed up and made my presence known. As an android, I could stay perfectly still, didn’t need to eat or go to the bathroom, and didn’t get stiff. On the other hand, I needed results.

I sent all my spiders out to scout around the complex. It was a little bit of a risk, as they were big enough to be visible from yards away if they were moving, but otherwise the camouflage function would make them very difficult to pick out.

However, the Quinlans didn’t appear inclined to move around a lot, either. One had gone to find a restroom, and another had brought out snacks from a refrigerator, but that was it. I wondered to what extent the Resistance members actually belonged in this complex and to what extent they were just living in the corners like rats. Could the Administrator monitor activity in here? If so, why had he not taken steps to clean it out and reclaim it? If not, why weren’t the Resistance everywhere in here?

I got a partial answer almost right away, when one of the spiders blundered into a dormitory. Bunk beds lined the walls, some currently in use. The sleepers brought the confirmed population up to ten, although there were enough spaces for up to eighteen.

I had the spider do a visual sweep, then back out slowly.

A couple of spiders had found big industrial metal doors. I wondered if those led to all the automation and maintenance equipment, assuming I’d gotten it right. I hoped they hadn’t put Bender back there. If I had to go a-visiting, it would increase my risk dramatically. But it didn’t seem likely. The Resistance probably had a better grip on the space on this side of the doors.

I decided it was time to return some calls. The spiders could operate autonomously, and they’d squawk if there was an issue.

First, Bill.

“Hey, Bob. So what was all the excitement?”

“I’m in Resistance HQ, as near as I can tell. Sniffing around.”

“No sign of Bender yet?”

“Not yet. I’m still confident of our logic, but there’s always the possibility that we’re just dead-wrong and he’s somewhere else.”

“At the other end of the segment maybe?”

“I don’t see how. Halep’s Ending is only a few miles away, and that’s the name that Bender said they used a lot. The only other possibility is if there’s some other hideout in the area. So what were you calling about?”

“Just an update on the war against Starfleet. We’ve basically pushed them into a corner, network-wise. Most of the equipment they hacked has either been cleaned or destroyed and is being replaced. But here’s the funny thing …”

“Yes?”

“I’ve had conversations with members of Starfleet over the course of several confrontations and negotiations. Everyone I’ve talked to is as surprised and perplexed by the degree of infiltration as we are. They all give the same story—that this came completely out of the blue. They have no idea who actually did all the hacking.”

“Oh … hell. Bill, I wonder if we’re really clean right now. I mean, the Skippies are good, but so is whoever engineered this. What if this someone has as much processing power, or even more? Or what if it’s a faction within the Skippies playing both sides?” As I said that, I realized that I’d never consciously suspected the Skippies, but that I’d had misgivings. Otherwise why would I have put that monitor in the drones way back when?

“Way ahead of you. I resurrected an archived source version of my comms from before there were even any Skippies or Starfleet and did a diff, then recompiled, so I’m demonstrably clean. And your temporary relay has never been corrupted. This conversation, at least, is probably secure.”

“Good. You’ll have to get all the Bobs to do their own cleanup and re-establish encryption keys. It’s going to take a while.”

“All under control, Bob. I just wanted to let you know on the q.t.”

We exchanged a few other comments, then I signed off. There’d been something off about Hugh’s behavior since the beginning, but unless they were clairvoyant, I didn’t see how they could be planning for anything that was going on. Unless it really had nothing to do with the Quinlans. But then what?

Of course, it might not be the Skippies at all.

Well, my next call was to Hugh, and I’d be watching for any weirdness.

“Hugh here.”

“Hey, Hugh, it’s Bob. I finally have a few milliseconds to rub together. What were you calling me about?”

“Ah, well, we sailed into East Point early today and I cashed out. The captain offered me a bonus to stay—I guess I’m a good worker …” Hugh’s voice carried a bit of suppressed laughter. I could relate. Take our Bobbian obsessiveness, add in the strength and stamina of a manny, and the cargo was probably getting stacked with mathematical precision.

“Anyway,” he continued, “I’d read your latest blog entry, and I had an idea. I wondered if there would be a similar entrance on the downstream side of the mountains so that maintenance personnel could get in from either side of the gorge. It seemed like it would be a reasonable design. And I was right. So anyway, I’m in, and so far at least, there’s no one home at this location.”

“No one? At all?”

“At all. I’m thinking the Administrator relies primarily on automation.”

“Hrmph. Possibly the most lackadaisical despot I’ve ever heard of. Makes me wonder what the Resistance is actually resisting. Have they ever tried just going ahead and building a steam engine?”

“That’s rhetorical, right? You’ve met Quinlans who’ve been scattered.”

“Yeah, yeah. So you’ll let me know if you find anything?”

“Will do, boss. Out.”

Well, that wasn’t particularly weird. Maybe he was having a good day. Or maybe he was lying through his teeth. Great. Now paranoia had me going around in tight little circles. I was going to have to stick to what I could control and not worry about the rest. Somehow.

One of my spiders bleeped me. I pulled up its video window and almost did an actual double take. On a table, surrounded by jury-rigged electronics, sat a version 2 replicant matrix. It sat on a version 2 Heaven-vessel matrix cradle, making any possibility of convergent design a nonstarter. If that wasn’t enough, the English labels on some of the surfaces supplied the kill shot.

Bender.

He was still powered up. It was good to know that they hadn’t cut off communications by shutting him down, or worse.

Of more concern was the lack of any of the electronics necessary for maintaining a VR. That meant that Bender had been here for more than 130 years without a pseudo-physical reality. That hadn’t worked out well for Henry or for Medeiros. Yet Bender had seemed reasonably well-adjusted when I’d talked to him, which gave me hope.

Now, how to get him out? Let’s see, I’d travelled several miles through the river from Halep’s Ending, which I’d have to retrace on land, carrying a large, ungainly matrix the whole way; I’d have to take the train back to Garack’s Spine and hope I didn’t run into anyone, then I’d have to get picked up and flown out without getting blown up by the Administrator’s guardians; oh, and yes, I’d first have to get him out of the Resistance’s lair. And all of this without getting spotted by the Administrator, Crew, or the Resistance, while fending off questions from curious random Quinlans.

No sweat.

I had the spider look around the room while I called one of the others over to act as lookout. Once I was sure that I couldn’t be surprised by a Quinlan unexpectedly showing up, I sent the spider down to the matrix.

As with the emergency door, no matter how complex your electronics, eventually it has to interface with the physical world. In this case, you have to convert sound to electricity or electricity to sound. I quickly found the microphone and speaker used to interact with Bender, along with a camera that presumably gave a video input. Nearby was a twin of the Motorola box from my earlier incarceration. So, pretty low tech—they simply had Bender talk into the mic just like a live person. Made sense, I guess. That way they could monitor what he was saying and hearing.

From my point of view, though, it meant I could jack into the system without endangering Bender. A couple of minutes spent tracing wires, and the spider had wired itself into Bender’s comms.

“Bender?”

There was a short delay, then, “Bob?”

“Right here, buddy. More or less. How are you doing?”

“Pretty damned good right now. How are you talking to me?”

I took a few seconds to explain the situation, and Bender laughed. “Man, that is some mighty fine Rube Goldberg. I tip my hat to you.”

“Listen, how are you doing? I didn’t see your VR hardware …”

“Yeah, I get where you’re going. I’ve been frame-jacking myself down to my lowest rate whenever possible. For me, it’s been a couple of minutes since our last conversation, including dialogs with my captors. So I’m not going stir-crazy yet, although I really would love a coffee.”

“I hear that. So anyway, I’m trying to figure out how to get you out of here. I don’t know how much you know about where ‘here’ is, but the big problem is to get your matrix through four thousand miles of megastructure, underwater most of the way, without rusting or shorting you out or getting caught by, well, both sides, I guess.”

“You could take transit.”

I laughed. “I took transit to get here. And hopefully I’ll be taking the train back to Garack. But first I have to get back to the train station with you in tow.”

“Ah. Gotcha.”

“Yeah, I stole a security card that works on the train. How is it that a Resistance member has one of those, anyway?”

“What do you think I’ve been doing for the last hundred years? They’ve had me figuring out the electronics and devising ways to hack things and hide them from the Administrator. This has included registering Resistance members on the Crew rolls.”

“Uh, as long as we’re on that subject, I’m still a bit unclear on the whole political situation here.”

“Okay, well, the Resistance has been operating almost since the day the Administrator took over. They were scientists, engineers, and technicians back then. Their descendants are still maintaining the fight, but educating each new generation has been spotty, so they’ve lost a lot as knowledge domains shrink. I’ve been helping with the gaps. In most cases, I don’t think the Administrator even realizes it’s been subverted.”

“What about real Crew? Do they use the trains?”

“A little bit. Most Crew is strictly local, used only for muscle when it’s necessary to interact with the population. They know even less than the Resistance. On the other hand, they’re paid better.” Bender chuckled. “There are, of course, people who belong to both groups. I’m sure the Administrator suspects this, which is why it keeps them in the dark as much as possible.”

“So is the Administrator a hereditary position? Or is it a committee? How do they stay trained from one generation to the next?”

There was silence for several seconds. “Jeez, Bob, I thought you knew. The Administrator isn’t a Quinlan. It’s an artificial intelligence.”

“What … the …” I seemed to be getting a lot of metaphorical gut-punches lately, and I quelled an urge to stand up and scream invective into the air. Suddenly the Skippies had a motive. “Bender, I have to phone Bill. Back in a few.”

Without waiting for a response, I composed a text. It would be easier to just lay it out and let Bill absorb that before responding. I fired off the message.

“Sorry about that. This is kind of important news. I had to let Bill know.”

“Wait, when will he get the message? Is he in this system?”

I laughed. “Instantaneous FTL communication, buddy. One of many things you’ll have to get used to.”

“Wow. That sure puts a different spin on the universe.”

At that moment, I got a response from Bill. “Explains a lot. Altering strategies as appropriate.”

So. I could probably get Bender back to our entrance location. I could probably do it without alerting Hugh. This was good. On the other hand, Hugh—oh, shit.

“Guppy, has Hugh interacted with the equipment in any way?”

[Hugh has given instructions for construction and deployment of stealth drones.]

“No other interactions?”

[None.]

Well, that was good. “Guppy, monitor all communications with Hugh. Disallow control of local maintenance or infrastructure systems, especially roamers. Confirm all orders from him with me before implementing.”

[Acknowledged.]

If Hugh had already subverted Guppy in some way, I was probably hooped. But I couldn’t see how he could alter firmware without some board-swapping and a full system restart. So for the moment, I would continue to act as if I was in control. And there would be an audit in my future.

And I couldn’t just stop interacting with Hugh. He was in charge of the local observation drones, and was the only other Bob who was in a position to run one of the Quinlan mannies. I would just have to be careful about what I asked of him.

“Bob? You still there?”

Oh. I guess I’d gone radio silent for a few moments. “Sorry, Bender. Just got a response from Bill, and now things are way more complicated. Not your problem, though, right now. Do you know how to get to the train station?”

“Nope. Sorry. I do know there’s one in this complex, though.”

In the complex? So I could have skipped Halep’s Ending entirely? Well, it made sense, although I wasn’t sure what destination I would have asked for.

In any case, I wasn’t going to just grab Bender and start running around at random. I guess I’d have to let the spiders finish mapping.



Six hours later, and there wasn’t anything even vaguely resembling a transit station.

“Ideas, Bender?”

“Sorry, Bob, I was offline when they brought me in. It could be any number of levels down—”

“Aw, hell!” I said, interrupting Bender. “I forgot about the elevator.”

“I guess you took the stairs, or you wouldn’t be here.”

I frowned. “How so?”

“Cameras on the elevators. The people onsite will know the moment an elevator is in use.”

“Can they override the elevators?”

“No, but they’ll be alerted and will be waiting when the doors open.”

“Great. So, stairs all the way. Bender, I don’t like this. I’m going to have to spend a godawful amount of time just looking around to find our escape route, with all the risk of being seen.”

“I got nothing, Bob. Sorry.”

“Okay. Do you have any more info on the trains? How often they run? Whether calling one will alert the Resistance? Stuff like that?”

Bender sighed. “Sorry, Bob. No info. I’m not trying to be difficult; like I said, I was offline.”



Going with my theory that Quinlans and humans designed things generally the same, I went all the way to the bottom level first. Nope. Turned out that’s where they kept all the pipes and valves and conduits. Which, it occurred to me, was probably the same as with human construction. Derp.

The next level up was a hit, though. A single long, antiseptic hallway, very similar to the transit station near Halep’s Ending, led to the boarding area with its ten doors. In this boarding area, though, there was a prominent button attached to the wall, clearly jury-rigged, with wires leading into a hole. That had probably been added by the Resistance, and probably bypassed the card readers, perhaps to allow people without cards to use the train. Ideally, I should press the button now, and have a train ready when I came back down with Bender. But did it alert the people upstairs when pressed? If so, I’d never get anywhere near Bender’s location.

Like it or not, I was going to have to commit to a strategy based on nothing but gut feelings. I couldn’t risk trying the call button now. I would have to take my chances and get back here with Bender before testing the system.

Now, could I get Bender’s matrix from his room to here without anyone noticing?

I headed back to Bender’s room, making sure to check for any Quinlans taking an unscheduled stroll. As soon as I was assured the coast was still clear, I recalled all my fleas and spiders. I wouldn’t get another chance to restock from the underwater mannies, so I was going to be especially careful with this set.

I sat down in front of Bender. “Good news, buddy: I found the train station. Bad news: we’ve still got a lot of unknowns and risk.”

“I don’t think we have a choice. Honestly, Bob, I don’t see myself staying sane if I’m stuck here forever. Even frame-jacking can only delay the inevitable. I think I’d rather go out in a dramatic chase scene, you know?”

I chuckled in response. “Okay, so, I’m just going to deactivate you, grab you, and run downstairs to the train station. How’s that sound?”

“What it lacks in elegance, it makes up for with wads of unearned optimism. Let’s do it.”

I walked over to the matrix, put my finger to the power button, and paused. “And Bender? If this all goes to hell, I’m glad I found you.”

“Me too, buddy. See you in the next life.”

I pressed the button and Bender powered down. The latches released smoothly, and I had his matrix under my arm.

The replicant matrix wasn’t a bunch of exposed circuitry, even in its first iteration back on Earth. There was a case of sorts, and even the connection bus had a flip-off cover. But like a hard drive from the good old days, if you put it in your backpack and smacked it on walls and dropped it on the floor, you could expect problems. So, no backpack ride.

The current iteration was a cube about eight inches on a side. Not too bulky, but pretty heavy. A Quinlan or a human would need to use both hands to carry it.

Feeling a rush of unearned optimism, I shifted the cube for comfort, turned the corner, and … ran right into a Quinlan.

Unbelievable. This twerp must have left the committee room right behind the spider that had been on surveillance. Why was he here? Maybe he’d intended to talk to Bender about something.

We stared at each other in shock for a frozen eternity. Then, just as his eyes moved toward the matrix under my arm, I punched him in the solar plexus.

That is really becoming a habit, I thought to myself. The Quinlan said oof and sank slowly to the floor, trying to draw a breath. Thank the universe for convergent physiology, at least he couldn’t yell out a warning.

Then from up the hall, “Matthew? You okay?”

Oh, for crying out loud. I’d never get the second—trank gun! I had a trank gun. I pulled it out of the pouch on the side of my backpack, levelled it at the second Quinlan who was just coming into view, and dropped him. Then I pointed down at my first victim—I hoped the close range wouldn’t create a problem—and put one into his butt. Amazingly, he found just enough breath to shriek in pain and very probably mortification.

“Matthew? Jeff? What—”

Oh, great balls of fire. I was just riling them up more. Time to make tracks. Fortunately they weren’t between me and the stairs, but I had to come into view to get there. As I turned the next corner and sprinted down the hall, I could hear cries of alarm behind me. Well, Bender, you wanted a chase scene. Wish granted.

I hit the stairway door at speed and sprinted down the steps, taking them three at a time—quite a feat for a Quinlan. My pursuers wouldn’t be able to match that. As I passed the second level down, I heard them come through the door above me. A quick calculation indicated I wouldn’t be able to get the door closed quickly enough to throw them off, which meant it would be a straight chase to the train platform. I was faster, pound for pound, but they would be able to run on all fours, not being burdened with a replicant matrix. In retrospect, maybe the backpack idea wasn’t so bad.

I hit the train floor, pushed through the stairway door, and made for the platform with every erg of power I could squeeze out of the internal power systems. I calculated I’d have about thirty seconds lead time when I got there. Sure hoped a train was waiting.

There were yells behind me as my pursuers piled out of the stairwell, and a ping tinkle as a tranquilizer fléchette skipped a few times along the floor near me. Way out of range, but I shouldn’t be surprised they’d try. I hoped Bender’s case was strong enough to stop one of those things, just in case it came down to a shootout. And speaking of, I had no idea how many shots I had left.

Y’know, things never got like this when I used to write software.

I made it to the call button and jabbed it frantically. Though, if the design was anything like a human elevator button, this would just slow down the train’s arrival. And nothing was going to convince me otherwise.

The sounds of galloping Quinlans drifted down the long antiseptic corridor. My thirty seconds were almost up. I turned, drew my trank gun, and shot the lead Quinlan just as he came into range. He went down with a yelp and skidded to a stop on his face. The others hit the brakes and backpedaled frantically. Then two of them went up on hind legs and pulled guns of their own.

Just as I was stealing myself for a toe-to-toe shootout, there was a ding behind me and the sound of a door opening. I turned and jumped through the door, looking around for a button, a control panel, anything. A female voice said, “Destination?”

Oh, great. “Uh, Halep’s Ending.”

There was another ding and the door began sliding closed, just as a fléchette flew in and struck me in the arm.

“Ow, son of a bitch.”

“Is medical assistance required?”

“No, let’s go please.”

“Please have a seat. Acceleration will begin in eight seconds,” said the train.

Eep. I plunked myself on the nearest seat, placed Bender on my lap, and examined the wound. Small, neat hole, penetration about a half-inch … It was actually a nicely tuned weapon. Internal systems were already breaking down the fléchette and starting repairs.

There were no windows in the tube train, a view of a tube not being particularly inspiring. But it meant I wasn’t able to see my pursuers as I pulled away from the station. I imagine they’d call a train as well, but could they follow this one? Could they ask the train attendant to let them off at the same platform?

“Train voice, can I specify a destination to be the same as the train in front of us?”

“There is no train in front of us.”

I examined the ceiling briefly. “Can occupants of a train behind us ask to be let off at the same station as us, without specifying it by name?”

“Yes.”

“Shit.”

“I do not understand that command.”

“Never mind. Thank you. How far behind us will the next train arrive?”

“It will arrive at the same location, not behind us.”

Grrrrr. “How many seconds after our arrival will the next train arrive?”

“There is a mandated interval of one hundred and twelve seconds between train departures and the next arrival.”

Oh, much better. “Thank you. No more questions.”

So I had just a shade under two minutes, that being the human translation of the Quinlan time unit vek, to get out of Dodge, or implement whatever strategy I came up with.

I’d asked to go to Halep’s Ending in a panic, but really I wanted to go to Garack’s Spine. But if I asked to go there, would they have a welcoming committee waiting? We’d already seen more than enough evidence that the Resistance’s communications were efficient and far-reaching. Could I pull a fast one?

“Train voice, can I change my destination choice before we arrive?”

“Yes, but it may still be necessary to stop at the original destination first, depending on traffic.”

“Can we leave without opening the doors?”

“Not if passengers are waiting.”

“Are passengers waiting?”

“Yes.”

Uh-oh.

Those would be either Resistance or, less likely, Crew. Neither group was likely to welcome me with open arms. Well, yes they would, but not for hugs.

I was going to have to put on some serious speed, which meant that Bender would have to go in the backpack. I just hoped that A) the matrix would fit, and B) I could tighten it down enough to prevent damage from jostling.

A frantic minute of fooling with the backpack resulted in a partial success. I was able to fit Bender in and tighten the straps, but I had to abandon most of the contents to make space and to prevent them banging around. So goodbye fléchette gun, extra knives, money …

In a moment of inspiration, I swallowed some coins. My artificial stomach could be turned off, preserving the coins intact. But I didn’t want to swallow too many and end up jingling when I moved.

The train began deceleration phase, and I looked around frantically. “Train voice, which door will be closest to one or the other edge of the platform?”

“The door three to your left, or the door six to your right.”

I dashed to my left, dropped to all fours, and went into a sprinter’s crouch. I had to hope I could clear the vestibule before they could get everyone over to my end.

The train pulled smoothly to a stop and the doors swooshed open. I immediately gave it all the gas I could, frame-jacking just enough to be able to evaluate the situation. I immediately evaluated that there were four Quinlans standing right in front of the door, holding a net. I changed direction slightly and barreled into one of the net holders, knocking him over backward. I launched off his forehead and galloped down the hallway. A quick glance backward, rolling my eyes instead of turning my head, revealed that there were enough Quinlans to cover all ten doors. That was a lot of personnel to bring to bear on very little notice. Where did they come from?

That was a question for another time. A much calmer time, filled with cups of coffee and purring cats. For now, I needed to amscray. I hit the emergency staircase door and began nearly flying up the stairs. I had to hope they wouldn’t be cover—

Two fléchettes hit me before I could react. Dammit. The gun-toting Quinlans stood in front of me, their eyes slowly getting wider as they realized that I was approaching way too fast, and I wasn’t slowing down. By this point, I’d pretty much perfected the run-them-down maneuver, and I didn’t even break stride. I noticed on the way past that the second one had his security card dangling from an attachment point on his backpack. I gave it a quick tug and with my already considerable momentum, it came off cleanly.

Chances were he’d notice, and report the card, but it was just a distraction. I still had Natasha’s card, and they probably hadn’t yet associated it with me.

At the top of the stairs, I stopped and changed my features to that of the card holder, or at least as close as I could manage in a few seconds and without a selfie. Then I pushed open the emergency door. Three Quinlans stood on guard, pistols in hand.

One said to me, “Rick. What’s up?”

I bent over, put my hands on my thighs, faked deep heaving breaths, and tried to gasp a lot. “Got him.” Pant, pant. “Need help.” Gasp, pant. “Too strong.” And I waved in the direction of the stairs, while keeping my head down so they couldn’t see my face clearly.

Apparently my acting chops were pretty good, as the trio headed for the stairs, barely glancing at me. As soon as they were out of sight, I went out the maintenance door and made for the wilderness.

The good news was that I was free of my pursuers. The bad news was that I was stuck in the Halep’s Ending area. They were obviously monitoring the train stations, and would probably maintain a guard on them for the foreseeable future. They couldn’t cover four hundred million stations, of course, but they didn’t need to. Without the trains, I was limited to what I could reach on foot or by water. And not even the latter, since I couldn’t take a chance on getting Bender’s matrix wet. The backpack was under considerable strain with the cube stuffed into it. One popped seam and that would be it.

I could possibly book passage on a boat, but they didn’t have passenger lines as such. You paid for deck space on a cargo vessel, and you fed yourself by fishing when hungry. Someone would eventually notice that I wasn’t going in the water, and questions would be asked.

Plus, there would probably be a BOLO out for a Quinlan with a large, lumpy backpack.

I needed to stop reacting and form some kind of plan. I found a field of tall grass and waded in a few yards, then plunked myself down. A little back-and-forth with my butt and I had a nice nest, out of view of anyone happening by. Then I made a call.

“Hey, Hugh?”

“Hi, Bob. What’s up?”

“Things are very interesting right now. Listen, can you arrange a scan of the area around Halep’s Ending?”

“Sure. Where is Halep’s Ending?”

“It’s near my location.”

“Sure. Where are you?”

“I’m near—” Grrrr. “Never mind. I guess I didn’t think that through.”

“Sorry, Bob. Still not enough equipment in the air to do random scans.”

“Got it. Thanks anyway.”

That was mildly embarrassing. I suspected I was still suffering from a bit of panic mode. I needed to slow down, calm down, take stock.

I gazed up at the fake blue sky, filled with real clouds and the occasional flock of birds. Lying there in a field of grass, it would be easy to lose the moment, to imagine myself back in Minnesota on one of those bluebird summer days. Except for the large mountains, and the stays holding up the central cylinder. That kind of blew the illusion.

The stays …

Will’s professor friend had said they were used to access the central cylinder. Four stays, corresponding to the four rivers, ran up from the mountains. If I was to get onto one of the other rivers, the Resistance’s search radius would become untenable.

But could I? Would Natasha’s card have access to the elevators up to the central cylinder?

Bender had said that he’d spent the last hundred years giving the Resistance hacked access. And why stop with the trains or maintenance complexes?

It was that or skulk around the area until they gave up. Or try to get somewhere overland. Or take a possibly even bigger chance on a boat.

Screw it. I’d already gotten into the underground maintenance complex once, and escaped. I doubted they’d expect me to go back there first thing. I sent a quick email to Will, asking him for any details on the location and accessibility of the transport system up the cylinder stays, then set off, yet again, for the mountains.

At least I knew the way.



I peered through the bushes and glared at the single guard standing in front of the maintenance complex access door, trying to burn out his brain with my heat vision. Sadly, no heat vision. The guard stood relaxed, unaware of his brush with death.

I could attack him and knock him out, but would he stay out long enough for me to get in and get to the elevator? And what about surveillance cameras? I hadn’t found any around the entrance before. But they’d be on full alert now, and they’d only leave a single guard if that guard was being watched.

C’mon, Bob, James Bond could handle this.

I could dig my way into the corridor. But that would take forever, and would probably be noticed. I could kill the guard—no, not really. Knocking him out was contraindicated. Bribery was unlikely to work, even if I had something to offer. Distraction? Throw a rock over there, then wait until he investigated? Nah, too cliché for words. He’d probably turn in the opposite direction, expecting an attack.

At that moment, a file arrived from Will. I put it on my heads-up and examined the images. It was a SUDDAR scan from a segment boundary, showing the area at the base of the stay, with inked-in annotations in a non-Bob hand. Probably the professor. But the important thing was that there was just enough detail for me to be able to find the complex’s entrance to the transport system up the stays. If I could get in. And if all the segment boundary complexes were identical.

I was stymied for the moment, so I might as well do something. I settled for searching for any cameras. Out came the spiders. I also wanted to be ready to move at a moment’s notice if an opportunity presented itself. So out came the fleas, to infest the door mechanism again. And I moved as close to the door as I could get while remaining hidden.

It took very little time to find the camera. Hidden in some foliage, it had been set up to point at the guard’s back. So the guard was as much bait as anything. They expected him to be attacked. Nice.

And speaking of the guard, he seemed to be getting restless. Over several minutes, he glanced around, paced a bit, and scratched himself a few times. I hadn’t done anything, so I wasn’t sure what was—oh. Hydraulic pressure, leading to a call of nature. Heh. The guard had moseyed over to a nearby bush and was—holy moly, what was I doing color commentary for? The guard had moved away from the entrance! And he had his back to it. I ordered the fleas to unlock the door, and as quietly as I could, I pulled it and slipped in. A couple of my spiders scurried in behind me, but most of them were left outside, along with most of my fleas. I could wait for them to dig their way in, but while I was doing that, the guard’s shift could end and his replacement could come traipsing up the corridor. Ungood for sure.

Nope. I’d have to leave them. And hope I didn’t come to regret that.

This part of the infiltration was almost routine, including the stair door that I’d previously jimmied. I went down one floor, which Will’s plans indicated would lead me to the elevator up to the central cylinder. If there were security cameras, I would just have to hope that I looked enough like Natasha to fool them.

And then I’d find out how good a hacking job Bender had been doing.





13. Getting Busy

Herschel

July 2334

Bellerophon

I got a ping from Will and replied with an invitation. He popped in within a mil. It had been, what, almost a century since Will had been aboard, even if only in virt? I’d long since gotten tired of playing with virt layouts and had reverted to the default library motif.

Will barely glanced around. “Hi, Herschel. Thanks for having me over.”

“Hey, Will, long time no see. I hope this isn’t going to be as dramatic as the last time.”

He snorted. “No, no intergalactic battles pending. That I know of, anyway. Just the usual dull roar whenever humans are involved.”

I gestured to a chair and called Jeeves. He showed up with a coffee for me and a Coke for Will. “You know, your general dislike for humans seems incompatible with the amount of effort you’re putting into Valhalla.”

Will paused to drink his Coke, taking long enough that it was probably a delaying tactic. “Honestly Herschel, it’s simply my version of Ragnarök. If things had gone just a bit different back in Epsilon Eridani, I might have been the one to stay there and start a Skunk Works instead of Bill. I regret that sometimes. Dealing with humans has soured me a bit. Okay, a lot.”

I nodded slowly, trying to keep my eyebrows from climbing my head. Will was not usually this forthright. Something was up. “Okay. You have a solution?”

“Yes. Something I’ve been working on for a while. The Ever Onward Society, which I understand you’ve been sniffing around. At least that’s what my sources tell me, and you’ve been fairly public about looking for colony volunteers. I think we’ve been working in parallel on very similar plans, to the point where the urge to scream copyright infringement is almost overpowering.”

I raised a finger and opened my mouth to respond before I realized I was about to argue copyright law. Instead I smiled at Will. “Okay, you got me reacting. Now give.”

“Going off on a tangent for a moment, you guys have published enough analyses of the Bellerophon so that we could replicate it if we wanted to, except with a working SURGE drive instead of plates. I, uh, I started building a slightly smaller version about fifty years ago …”

I goggled at him. “In the 82 Eridani system? And no one noticed? That’s a lot of material.”

He grinned in reply. “Well, first, I’ve been very active with this Valhalla thing, and it takes a lot of effort and material to build all those fractionators and so on. And the colonies have mostly been concentrating on planetside improvements, so it’s not like we’re getting in each other’s way. Besides, the standard agreement between Bobs and colonies allows us to harvest such materials as may be necessary for activities relating to our original purpose, without compensation to the colony. I just never mentioned the side project.”

“Wow, that’s lawyerish. And it’s still a lot of steel.”

“The standard agreement doesn’t set any limits on how much we can take. It’s never really come up.”

I rubbed my eyes and checked metadata. Yep, definitely Will. “Okay, this is a little mind-boggling, especially coming from you, but I still don’t see the connection to us.”

“A couple of things, Herschel. First, your goal appears to be to place a colony far from current human space, with no attempt to maintain communications. I get why you want to do that, but I don’t think the part about severing communications is necessary. Second, your idea of sending AMI Heaven vessels ahead of you is a kludge forced on you by having a bunch of colonists in your belly. Even the original project designers on Earth were reluctant to trust AMIs with that level of executive control. Except China, of course, and look how that ended.”

Will paused, and I tilted my head and gave him the side-eye. “Okayyyyyyy …”

“What I intend to do is spit out ready-made space stations as I pass by systems. The stations decelerate to place themselves in a solar orbit and will have drones onboard to do a system survey. AMIs can handle that. And in the event there turns out to be something at all interesting, the stations will include a blank replicant matrix, just ready for a Bob to download into and take over. And if not, we still have an AMI-controlled relay station at every system along my flight path.”

I nodded slowly. “Bob seeds. And you never have to slow down. But again, why tell us?”

“If I lead and you follow,” Will replied, “then you’ll know when I find a good colony target, well before you reach that point. And once you’ve established a colony there, you’ll still have a full hold of material. So from that point on, you can do what you were originally planning.”

“Or do it your way.”

Will shrugged. “Sure, whatever.”

“Why, Will? What’s with this urge to head for the edge of the universe? Because this sounds like the same kind of thing Phineas and the others have been doing.”

“And you and Neil. What’s your motivation for this?”

“I’m concerned about running into someone or something that can wipe out humanity. We’ve found a lot of intelligent races for the small segment of the galaxy that we’ve explored. It’s only a matter of time until we run into something we can’t handle.”

Will nodded. “No disagreement, Hersch, but don’t you find it curious that all the civilizations we’ve found are or were at about the same age, give or take a few hundred to a few thousand years? No K2s or Heechee or anything at that level. Don’t you wonder why that is?”

“Not necessarily. The local stars are all of similar type, similar age, with similar metallicity. There’s really only a billion-year or so window when life can develop, so—”

“I know where you’re going, but I’m talking about a window of a few thousand years. That’s a lot more coincidental. And nothing more advanced out to as far as we can see.”

“The Dyson dilemma? Will, there’s a simple solution to that. With Casimir power sources, civilizations don’t have to cluster around their suns. Except the Others, who had a biological imperative.”

“Yeah, yeah, but still. Nothing. You don’t think we’re at the pinnacle of knowledge, do you?”

I laughed. “No, of course not. But it’s a pyramid, by necessity. The most advanced civilizations at the top will be the smallest group.”

“Not good enough.” Will shook his head. “At least, I don’t think so. There’s something more at play. But there’s no conflict, Hersch. Your motivation and mine are compatible. Either way, we both want to get humanity more spread out. And while it’s laudable that you’re going to found a colony or two on the way out, this is still very much a one-way trip for you too, isn’t it? Look, I can’t speak for Phineas, or Ick and Dae, or any of the other Bobs. But for me, the problem is that I can’t shake myself loose. You know why I’m still our rep in the UFS?”

I laughed. “Because everyone knows if no one else volunteers, you’ll keep doing it.”

Will chuckled a little ruefully. “I didn’t think it was that obvious, but yes. I have this outsized sense of duty. It’s my replicative drift, I guess. But they can’t expect me to continue to carry it if I’m not around.”

“Wow.” I shook my head and thought for a moment. “To be honest, I’m coming around to the idea that this maybe isn’t some kind of sinister urge taking us over. Bob-1 was looking forward to the adventure when he left Sol that first time—I distinctly remember the feeling. Maybe this is what we’ve all always wanted but have gotten distracted out of.”

“Not all of us. I doubt you could get Howard to budge. Or the Gamers. Or Bill, for that matter.”

“Yes, they’ve found something else to dedicate themselves to. Original Bob had a strong sense of responsibility as well. You’re not that far removed in that way, Will. But in the absence of anything to tie us to one spot, I guess there’s a little wanderlust still in all of us.”

“I agree,” Will replied, “but I don’t think it’s strictly either/or. Guilt can do funny things to people.”

I nodded. We settled into a mutual silence for a few mils, although I couldn’t decide if it was the awkward or companionable variety.

Neil popped in at that moment. “Will! Long time no see. Come to inspect our research?”

Will looked surprised, and I controlled the urge to roll my eyes. I couldn’t suppress a low growl, though.

“Research?”

I waved a hand in dismissal. “Well, we do have this large ship, full of raw material, and a lot of time on our hands …”

“I hadn’t heard anything.”

“We haven’t been posting any papers,” I said. “Neither of us is quite sure why. The best we can come up with is that we’re not sure if we want this stuff to be public yet.”

“Oh, now you’ve really got me curious,” Will said.

I shot Neil a glare, which he studiously ignored. “We’d appreciate it if you’d keep it quiet until we feel ready to do a reveal.” I sent Will a guest manny address, then closed my virt session and entered my personal manny.



I pulled myself out of the manny pod. Beside me, Neil was just sitting up. On the other side of him, Will was peering over the edge of the guest manny’s pod.

“This is the Bellerophon’s control cavern,” I said to Will, gesturing around us.

“You’ve pressurized it?” he replied.

“Just the control cavern. The rest of the ship is still in vacuum. We have to use the airlock if we want to go anywhere else, but that’s a minor inconvenience.”

I lifted off from the pod and hovered a few feet away. Will’s eyebrows rose on his head. “You’re, uh, you appear to be flying in control.”

I grinned at him. “These mannies have small SURGE drives, based on the mover plate technology. Very small. Good for maybe a tenth G, and not sustainable over planetary distances. At least not yet. But they’re perfect for moving around in free fall.” I demonstrated by doing a few loops, then returning to my original position.

Will grinned, then got that slightly distracted look manny operators get when they’re concentrating on internal systems. Then he shot out of his pod with a whoop, did some barrel rolls, and swooped over to us. “How is this something you’d be reluctant to share? This is awesome!”

Neil replied before I could. “This isn’t what we’re talking about, Will. This is a minor item we implemented for convenience on the Bellerophon. Until we get the SURGE power up a lot higher, it’s not useful for anything but free fall maneuvering, and I can’t think of any situation where mannies are used right now where this would be useful. Except here, of course.”

“I bet every Bob in existence would want a turn, though,” Will said, still slowly doing loops. “But okay, let’s see what you consider to be more than a minor item.”

I gestured him to follow and headed over to a corner of the cavern, where we’d set up our workshop. Walls, cables, pillars, and stanchions had been welded to the deck in whatever random location we’d needed them at the time. Looking at it through fresh eyes, I felt a twinge of embarrassment. It did look somewhat haphazard.

But Will didn’t seem to mind. He headed unerringly for the structure that dominated the work area. It vaguely resembled an oversized manny pod, but with a lot of science-fiction-ish greebles tacked on. I did a quick mental inventory to check if any of those were actually gratuitous. Will would probably ask.

He stopped, hovering in front of the pod. “This is impressive. I have no freaking clue what it is, but I like it already.”

I cocked my head at Neil. “You want to do the honors, or should I?”

“You had it last time,” he replied. “My turn.”

I gave Neil a pro forma eye roll, then gestured for him to get on with it. “I’ll hold your manny,” I said, and grabbed his arm just as his manny went slack.

Will looked from one of us to the other, perplexed. “He’s gone back to virt? Why—”

He was interrupted by a door opening on the giant pod. Will floated back several feet as our experimental manny stepped out and hovered in place. I gestured to it. “This is the Ex-Man-1. Stands for Experimental Mannequin One. Neil is running it right now.”

Will’s expression was slack with amazement as he examined it. The size and shape were consistent with our standard Bob mannies, but the Ex-Man-1 was a mottled silver-grey color. It wore no clothes and had no particular gender. Neil did an exaggerated bow, then slowly rotated in place, grinning the whole while.

“So what do you call it?” Will asked. “Instead of Ex-Man-1, I mean.”

Neil and I exchanged a glance. Will looked back and forth at us, noting our no-doubt shamefaced expressions. “Okay, guys, give. You can’t tell me you haven’t come up with a nickname.”

I responded, with a sickly smile, “Mannequin Skywalker.”

Will stared at me for several mils before responding. “You’re despicable.”

He flew over and examined the manny at close range. “The skin, er, surface, whatever. It seems to be, um, moving? It’s a little unsettling, to tell the truth.”

“This manny,” I replied, “is made up entirely of ants. Or our adaptation of the ants, to be more precise. We’ve managed to miniaturize them to about the size of a tardigrade. They link up, kind of like actual cells, and can form any shape we program into them.” I grimaced. “We haven’t quite got the fine control nailed yet, though. Neil’s skin actually is crawling.”

Will made a face of exaggerated disgust. “Man, I can see someone getting a phobia just being near that thing. For that reason alone, I’d approve of not making it public.”

“The thing is, Will,” I said, “this design can shape-shift. Not quickly yet, but we’ll keep improving it. There’s no built-in discrete structure as such. Every ant unit is capable of doing any required task by reconfiguring itself. Everything from the SCUT transceiver to the SURGE drive is built from cooperating units. Skeletal structures are generated by units locking themselves together with double bonds. And so on. The computer core is distributed throughout the structure, as is the power core. There’s no Achilles’ Heel, no weak spot. That’s a lot of power for a post-human replicant.”

Will nodded. “Yeah, I get it. Look, when you feel like it’s ready for a real demo, let’s have the senior Bobs look it over and maybe make a recommendation.”

“Sounds good.” I looked at Neil and tilted my head. He nodded and climbed back into the pod.

Will shook his head in wonderment. “Wow. This beats Transformers and Space Whales hands down.”





14. Getting Out

Bob

July 2334

Heaven’s River

I don’t know what I would have done if I’d run into a security patrol. I no longer had a fléchette gun, and needing to be careful about Bender’s matrix meant most of my go-to tactics were unavailable. Fortunately, the subject didn’t come up. It was quite possible that all personnel were outside looking for me around the Halep’s Ending transit station.

I stared at the elevator. It didn’t really look that different from any other. Maybe a little larger door. The problem was the button. Or more accurately, the sign over the button that said, “Authorized Personnel Only.” There was a card reader beside the button.

I took a totally unnecessary deep breath and pulled out Natasha’s card. Moment of truth. I doubted that a failure would result in sirens and flashing red lights, but it would certainly alert someone, and I’d have visitors by and by. And nowhere to run.

Before I could kvetch any more, I pushed the card against the reader, then pressed the button. The button lit for a moment, and the door opened. Hallelujah! I was in business. I entered the elevator and pressed the top button, since that would be where I’d transfer to another stay.

The doors closed, and the elevator accelerated upward. And I realized something that I’d failed to notice when I boarded. This elevator had windows.

I shouldn’t have been surprised. The Quinlans had long since shown that they had a strong visual artistic sense. Naturally, they wouldn’t waste the opportunity to display this view. I had fifty-six miles of vertical travel in which to enjoy it, and … uh …

I didn’t specifically remember ever having had acrophobia, but I’d never been going literally miles up into the air with a panoramic view before. I had to consciously stop myself from stepping to the back of the elevator. If this got any worse, I might have to activate the endocrine control system.

I deliberately stood at the window and observed, while trying to control my breathing. The curve of Heaven’s River was becoming visible, and we’d already passed at least one cloud layer. The river system, forests, townships, and dots on the water that could be boats all spread out below me in a panorama that exceeded anything I’d seen in a lifetime several hundred subjective years long. I made a point of recording as much as I could and forwarding it to my blog.



The trip took twenty minutes total, which was quite impressive. Deceleration was accompanied by an automated suggestion to place my feet on the ceiling, as the centrifugal gravity by that point was almost nonexistent.

When the doors opened, I was in as close to zero G as made no difference. The corridor had a visible curve, with doors and side corridors spaced regularly along it. The sign beside the elevator said, “Utopia Spoke.” Handy. I just needed to move over to the other east-flowing river, the Nirvana.

I picked a random direction and headed off. As with my first day, when we broke into Heaven’s River, the Quinlan body had no trouble adapting to zero G movement. Handholds along the corridor helped as well.

Within a few minutes, I’d found the Nirvana Spoke elevator. Small problem—the elevator was at ground level. So there would be a twenty-minute wait.



The ride down was very much like the ride up, in reverse. Strangely, starting from a view from orbit kind of panorama made it easier to get used to the height without cringing. By the time it started to resemble real land, I was verging on bored.

This maintenance complex was uninhabited, which led me to believe that most of the population of the mountains was probably Resistance. I made it to the train station without incident and pressed my card against the reader plate.

“Not authorized.”

I looked up sharply. “What?”

“Your identification is not authorized.”

Oh, great. They’d cancelled my card. Well, Natasha’s card. It had been inevitable, but couldn’t they have done it after I’d gotten on the train? I fished out the second card, the one I’d grabbed from the guard, and tried it.

“Not authorized.”

Well, that was that. I looked around, half-expecting the entire population of hell to come pouring out. But this complex was uninhabited. Come to think of it, I’d never seen or heard of the Administrator using anything but live muscle inside Heaven’s River. Maybe automated muscle was forbidden. It sounded like the kind of limitation you’d place on an AI to keep it from taking over. And how had that worked out for the Quinlans?

Still, while I wasn’t about to be tackled, I also wasn’t about to get a free ride back to Garack’s Spine. And hordes of minions could be on their way right now. Their cards would work. A hasty departure seemed advisable.

Back up the hallway, up the stairs, and soon I was in the lobby. The maintenance door opened easily from the inside, and I was out in the open. I could see a town in the distance, but I had no idea what it might be called. I was a quarter turn around the circumference of Heaven’s River and thirty-eight hundred miles west of Garack’s Spine, which was my only way out. I had an eight-inch cube in my backpack, sticking up like a carbuncle and advertising my presence to any Crew or Resistance who might be looking for me. I might as well be wearing a hard hat with a flashing red light. Oh, and I couldn’t risk going in the water.

Piece of cake.



I needed a story. Some plausible reason for the big lump in my backpack. A quick glance up at the sun confirmed the day was young; I had plenty of time to get to the town before dark. But maybe I shouldn’t. I had only the coins in my stomach, and I might need them for something more critical than lodging. I dithered for a few moments, then decided I might as well head for town while I tried to come up with something.

First, I’d need to update Hugh.

“Hi, Hugh.”

“Bob! Got news?”

“Of a sort. I have Bender—”

“That’s great! I’ll meet you at Garack’s Spine, and we can get out of here …”

“Ah, it may not be that simple.” I updated Hugh on recent events and my current location.

“Well, that’s suboptimal,” he said. “Listen, you can’t be the first Quinlan that’s needed to carry something large. A funerary box is about the same size, for instance …”

“Uh, what?”

“Bridget can probably give you anthropological details, but Quinlans keep the bones of their deceased. Ground up, they fit into a box of about the right size.”

“You’d accumulate a lot of boxes over time,” I commented.

“Yeah, I dunno, ask Bridget. But maybe check around town, someone might have something that would keep the box dry. Maybe you can find a funerary box and test it out.”

“That’s an excellent idea, Hugh. Thanks.”

“Then you just need to travel seven segments to Garack, and you’re golden.”

“Thanks a bunch, Hugh. And with that cheery thought, I’m signing off.”

Still, one problem at a time. I paused and prairie-dogged to get a close look at the town. Things might be looking up the slightest, teeniest bit.

I composed and fired off an email to Bridget, not wanting to spare the cycles for a conversation. I’d review whatever she sent me when I had time. The first order of business, though, was to not come into town along the road from the maintenance complex. If someone was watching for a Quinlan with a carbuncle, that would be the obvious place to set up.

Moving through the bushes was more of a pain than expected. I remembered Bridget mentioning that the climate varied from segment to segment, probably to replicate conditions on Quin. This segment had a more tropical motif, which meant thicker and more riotous vegetation. And probably a lot more variety in the way of predators. And me without so much as a pigsticker in my inventory.

After a half-hour of bushwhacking accompanied by my best cursing, I decided enough was enough. I spied a trail ahead that likely led to a regular road and made for it. The path led through some pretty rundown residential structures, and I began to worry about being mugged. A couple of rough-looking characters did give me the evil eye, but no one made a move.

In fifteen minutes more, I was in the town proper, which was named Forest Hill. I buttonholed a few random strangers, and eventually got directions to a funeral home. The Quinlan translation was more like “House of Setting Sun,” which was oddly poetic for a culture that named cities after people’s body parts.

I entered the establishment and glanced around. An elderly Quinlan came over to me. “May I be of service?”

“I, uh, I’m concerned about getting my grandfather waterlogged. I’m not sure exactly what might be available …”

“Are you transporting your ancestor over a large distance?”

“Yes, to Garack’s Spine.”

“I’m not familiar with that city. However, the normal strategy is to have the ancestor sent by post. Carrying the box on your back …” The salescritter ostentatiously leaned sideways to look disapprovingly at my backpack.

I felt like I should blush or something. “I’m hoping to bring him home myself. I’d like instead to find a way to wrap the box or get a better backpack …” I left the sentence hanging, hoping the salescritter would volunteer something.

He glanced at my backpack again, then asked, “What size of funerary box?”

“Uh …” Bender’s matrix was eight inches on a side. “Inside dimensions eight and a quarter inches,” I said, trusting the translation software to take care of the conversion to local units.

“That’s oddly precise. Also not a standard size. Here …” He wrote something on a piece of paper and handed it to me. “My cousin Vinny is a carpenter. He could probably put something together to your specifications. Tell him Carmine sent you.”

Of course. This wasn’t a mass-production society. Artisans would be easily available. I resisted the urge to smack myself, and thanked Carmine profusely.

I left the funeral home, chuckling at the software’s choice of name-equivalents. I’d have to ask Hugh if there’d been a little tweaking of the algorithms. Given what I’d done with Hugh’s name-equivalent, it was clearly Bob-like behavior.

I read the note while wondering if I should ditch the backpack and cube while I worked. I could hide it in the forest, or I could get a room in a hotel. What would carry less risk? The forest would certainly be cheaper. But I couldn’t bring myself to seriously consider tying Bender up in a tree and leaving him to the tender mercies of random chance. I did a quick calculation. I wasn’t destitute yet, but I might end up working for passage on the way back to Garack’s Spine. Meanwhile, keeping Bender safe was job one.

I stopped at a general store and bought a few small items for three coppers total. I gave the proprietor an iron and received my change. I had a brief urge to swallow the coins right in front of her, but attracting attention was not a good idea.

With a little searching around, I found a fleabag hotel and paid for a night. The kindest word I could find for the room was unimpressive. But it had a door lock, and the door felt solid, and the window was much too small for a Quinlan to get through, even if the room had been at ground level. And as was typical for Quinlan structures, the roof was exposed, support beams and all.

I took out the length of rope that I’d purchased and did a quick leap and parkour to the rafters. It wouldn’t be, strictly speaking, impossible for a Quinlan to duplicate that feat, but they would be more likely to just go get a ladder. Which would hopefully take time. I tied the backpack with Bender in it to the highest point and shifted it around to be as invisible as possible from floor level. All good.

I left my one remaining spider on the rafter as well. Just in case.

The Quinlan door locks were large and clunky compared to what I’d been used to on Earth, but the mechanism was nevertheless fairly sophisticated. Again, I was reminded that the Quinlans’ technology was limited, not their knowledge. I spit up a few coins to carry with me, locked the door behind me, and sent in a couple of fleas to freeze the lock mechanism. I was probably being overly paranoid, but the downside of overdoing it was much less bad than the downside of underpreparing.

First stop was a backpack shop. On Earth that would have been a sports store, but with Quinlans, backpacks were simply apparel. A few quick inquiries on the street and I had a destination.

The shop was definitely upscale. Not as in gold trim, but as in high quality and good selection. They carried backpacks, sashes, kits for fur decoration, and other items that the sophisticated and stylish Quinlan couldn’t live without. I just hoped the backpacks were more than fashion statements.

I approached the single salescritter. “I’m looking for a new backpack. My old one popped a seam because I’ve been carrying a funerary box in it. Do you have something with good capacity and dependable waterproofing?”

“As it happens, we do. You shouldn’t, of course, spend a lot of time in water, but it’ll hold for the occasional fishing expedition.” He led me over to a display and gestured. “Only five irons for this model.”

Eep. That would take most of my remaining cash. I opened my hand and looked down at the four irons I’d coughed up, trying to project disappointment, piteousness, and whatever else I could manage. He glanced at the coins in my hand and sighed. “I can’t do four, my friend. Four and a half and it’s yours.”

No problem, sir, I’ll just … hack … hack … hack …

No, not really. The urge was almost overpowering, but even ignoring not wanting to attract attention, I was sure he’d throw me out. “I’ll, uh, talk to my friends. Back in a while.”

I left the shop and went looking for Vinny’s place. On the way, I surreptitiously coughed up some more coins.

Vinny’s place had a sign over the door that said Vinny’s Place. Really, Quinlans sucked with names. The window showed some of his products, including funerary boxes, small furniture, and some carved items. He did good work.

“Are you Vinny?” I said to the lone occupant as I walked in.

“I am. May I help you?”

“Carmine sent me here. I’m looking for a specific size of funerary box. He thought you might be able to help me.”

Vinny’s face lit up, and I realized that Carmine must actually be a relative, and well-liked. I hoped that would help my cause. We spent a few minutes talking about my requirements.

“It’s an odd size, and oddly specific,” he said.

“I’m trying to protect my existing box,” I explained. “My grandfather died a long way from our family home. I have to bring him back there, and I can’t afford the obvious methods.”

“I admire your dedication, young sir. I can produce such an item. It will take about three days and will cost six irons. However, I can’t guarantee that it will be watertight. That simply isn’t normally part of my requirements.”

Wow. Between the room, the backpack, and the box, I’d be wiped out. And I would still have to pay for passage. And I didn’t have any choice about going by boat. While the manny would probably survive a seven-segment swim, I very much doubted that Bender would arrive still dry. Like it or not, I was going to have to play tourist. Or deckhand.

But I had no choice in the end. We talked some more, and I considered trying to haggle him down, but the simple lack of waterproofing rendered it moot. In the end, I thanked him for his time and told him I’d think about it.



I was heading back to the backpack store when I received an alert from the spider in my room. Someone seemed to be trying to unlock the door, and they were being increasingly unsubtle about it. The fleas had rigged the lock well enough that the interlopers would have to break down the door to get in. Would they go that far? Would anyone notice or investigate? It wasn’t a high-class neighborhood, but the proprietor might object to costly damage and a room that would be un-rentable for a while.

And the would-be home invaders agreed. After a few more rattles, the sounds of assault stopped. I had no illusions that that was the end of it. It appeared none of my plans for the day were going to succeed.

I changed direction and picked up speed, not quite breaking into a run. As I moved, I stretched my features and changed my fur patterns back into Natasha’s face. That might get me in the door without being observed.

The door to my room was still intact, although the lock and knob was a little more scarred than I remembered. No one appeared to be hanging around. I didn’t kid myself, though. There would be surveillance. Whether they were looking for Bob or Natasha, or both, was an unknown. Whether it was Crew, Resistance, or both was pretty much irrelevant at this point. My fate at the hands of either party, and more important, Bender’s fate, was a foregone conclusion.

I glanced at the window speculatively as I was climbing up to my pack. No such luck. What had originally seemed like a security feature was now a trap. There was only one way out of this room.

But not necessarily so for the building. They’d be watching the front and back doors, but maybe there was a third alternative.

I collected my spider and fleas, then locked and re-jammed the door. The scam probably wouldn’t distract my pursuers for long, but every little bit helped. Meanwhile, I needed to be out of here. I headed for one of the two second-floor bathrooms for some privacy and a chance to think.

How to get out undetected? I couldn’t just go downstairs and peek out the front door without attracting attention. I’d accepted it as a given that someone was watching the front. Probably the back as well. And there were only the two doors. From the bathroom window I could see the alley, where one of the pub staff was tossing something into the dumpster. I snorted. Dumpsters. Another parallel.

Wait—what other parallels were there? Food deliveries, garbage pickup … even a dump like this needed services supplied by other companies.

I took a quick glance out into the hallway. No one. I made my way to the back of the building, where presumably the kitchen and storage areas would be. On the way, I passed a cleaning person with a cart. The cart included a garbage can of sorts, made of wood. No trash bags here. The cleaner was working on one of the rooms, so I grabbed the can off the cart. As I continued down, I placed my backpack in the can, then hoisted it up so the contents weren’t visible.

I got a glance or two as I passed through the service area, but who’s going to question someone who is obviously working? Chances were the hired help around here was transient and part-time anyway. I made it out to the back, holding the can up so it obscured my face, and making a show of struggling with the weight.

The dumpster was up against a fence, something I’d noticed from the bathroom. What wasn’t discernible was whether the fence would collapse the moment I put my weight on it. But it didn’t matter—I was committed.

I swung the can around, still projecting this is really heavy, y’all with every pore, and upended it onto the edge of the dumpster. As I tipped it, I grabbed the backpack before it could drop into the bin. I pulled the can back with one hand, put it upside down on the ground as quietly and quickly as possible, and used it to vault over the fence.

There was a shout behind me and I could hear running feet, but I was already on the other side and out of sight. I had perhaps two seconds to get out of view of someone coming over the fence. A quick glance said that west was the shorter sprint to cover. I went east.

As I turned into another alley, I heard the thump of someone landing, and a curse. Did I mention that Quinlans weren’t particularly acrobatic? Smiling to myself, I imagined a couple of sprained ankles. That would slow them down.

Meanwhile, though, best make tracks. I dodged and wove through alleyways and quieter streets, avoiding any area with too many potential witnesses. Within minutes, I was at the edge of town. Without breaking stride, I headed for the forest.



Sleeping in a tree. Not a phrase a Quinlan was likely to use. Which made it ideal for me. I found a particularly large, heavily foliaged specimen and set myself high up in the thicker parts. I spit out my spider for sentry duty, clamped my arms around the trunk, and ordered the AMI to stay put.

Everything seemed stable for the moment, so I exited the manny and popped into my VR.

“Hugh, I’m in virt if you feel like popping over.”

“Sorry, Bob. Stacking cargo. I’ll try to get away later, though.”

Hmmph. Honestly, I wasn’t sure what I would say to him anyway. Did I want to confront Hugh about the Administrator thing? What would I accuse him of, exactly? I didn’t even know for sure that he was aware the Administrator was an AI. And if he did? Say he admitted to suspecting it. What law or rule, exactly, had he broken?

My suspicions were second-order, I realized. Suspicions of suspicions. I would have to keep a lid on it until I figured out what, if any, nefarious motives Hugh or the Skippies might have.

I tried connecting to Gandalf but got an autoreply. Probably Gandalf was fighting orcs or something.

Quickly, I checked Bill, Will, Bridget, and Howard, and got either busy signals or autoreplies. It appeared everyone in the Bobiverse was a little tied up at the moment. With a bad-tempered grumble, I called up a coffee and activated Spike.

So, item: I had seven segments to traverse, and it would have to be mostly by boat. Come to think of it, even if I trusted the Quinlan postal system to deliver Bender safely, it wouldn’t be any faster. The mail travelled by boat.

Item next: I still had to get out of Heaven’s River once I got to Garack’s Spine. In principle, that shouldn’t be an issue. We had the side entrance hatch that Gandalf had built. On the other hand, the locals were much more aware of us now. Of me, particularly. As Will’s professor friend had rightly pointed out, I was probably going to show up on a lot of surveillance systems from now on. I could disguise myself, but I couldn’t disguise the backpack.

Or couldn’t I?

Granted I had to watch my money, but my biggest hurdle right now was to get out of Forest Hill. Once I could lose myself in the vastness of Heaven’s River, I might be okay. So how to get out of town without exposing Bender’s matrix to view …?





15. Frustrations Mount

Howard

July 2334

Trantor

“Well, that tears it,” I said. “Humans are idiots.”

Bridget sighed. “Given what’s going on, Howard, I think they’ve shown considerable restraint in grandfathering us.”

“Or they’ve noticed that we own half the damned city and they’d lose a proxy fight.”

“That may have played a part, I admit.” Bridget walked to the picture window and gazed out, arms crossed.

I enjoyed the panoramic view of the atmosphere of Big Top through the distant fibrex dome of the city. The sight of clouds and Jovian life stretching off in all directions, seemingly to infinity, never failed to fill me with awe. But I knew that, for Bridget, it was about more than the view; it was a validation of her work and her professional reputation. She was the reigning expert on Jovian-class life throughout human space and was unlikely to be dethroned anytime soon. A passing pod of blimps brought a slight grin to her face.

“You have that smile,” I said. “Remembering our first encounter?”

Bridget laughed. “Or the city’s first encounter.” She turned from the window. “Howard, political issues come and go, but politics will be with us forever. We’ll just outwait them. Eventually people will calm down, or forget, or we’ll just wait until they’re dead and a new generation is in charge. Meanwhile, we keep a relatively low profile. We’ll be okay. We have forever, remember?”

“The kids—”

“The current batch are all adults. We’ll have to hold off on new adoptions for a while. You said you needed a break anyway. Maybe it’s time for another expedition. I have several candidate planets lined up, all with interesting-looking ecosystems …”

“You’ve heard what Herschel and Neil are planning?”

“Yes, but they have to get to Romulus, load up, then get out of human space. It could be as much as a hundred years before they reach the first new system, with no guarantees that it’ll have anything worth exploring. And we can join up remotely, if and when. I want something a little more immediate.”

I nodded. Bridget was right. If it came down to it, we’d only be in trouble if the humans tried to confiscate our assets. And we had lawyers up the ying-yang for just that eventuality. We could literally keep the fight going in the courts longer than most of our opponents’ lifetimes.

“All right, my love. You lead. Where do you want to go today?”





16. Still Trying

Bob

July 2334

Nirvana River System

I found myself surreptitiously reaching for my face again and consciously brought my arm back down. I had disguised myself once more, this time using a random passerby as my model. To avoid a “twins” issue, I’d tweaked the appearance a little. If I ran into my model, he might think he’d discovered a long-lost brother, but nothing more.

After much soul searching, I’d reluctantly left Bender tied up in the tree. No Quinlan was going to climb that high, not even with a gun pointed to their head. Wildlife tended to be small and not overly curious if something didn’t smell like food. Bender was probably okay, but I was still terrified that something might happen and I’d have no way of ever finding him.

But I had to make a clean break from Bob running around with Bender on his back to random guy going on a trip. And the best way to do that was to never allow anyone to see anything that would link us.

So Enoki Funguy, social gadfly and otter-about-town, was going to book a cruise on a local luxury vessel. Or, more factually, I was going to try to work my way across seven segments disguised as Random Guy. But, and this was the good part, I would have luggage.

I glanced up at the sign over my destination: Happy Al’s Storage and Trunks. Well, that’s not quite what it said, but metaphorically it wasn’t far off. Quinlans didn’t go in for Samsonite luggage, but they did have occasional need for rigid boxes of the locking variety. Some of the items on display very much resembled old-fashioned steamer trunks, except without the metal strapping. That would have cost more than I was worth. But wood and leather could do a pretty good job, if worked properly.

Happy Al—who, it turned out, went by the name of Steve—greeted me effusively as I walked in the door. I guessed that business had been slow and Steve was bored to the point of suicide. That could work for me.

“I’m looking for one of those”—I pointed to a steamer trunk—“about this size.” I held my hands apart to illustrate. I wanted a trunk that would be bulky enough that someone couldn’t grab it and run away, but small enough for me to carry. “And with a security loop like the one in the window.”

Steve straightened. “Sir, all of our trunks have security loops. And locks. We carry only the best stock.”

Erm, on the one hand, that was good. On the other hand, it sounded expensive. But this part of my plan had very little wiggle room.

Steve made for the back of the shop and returned in seconds with a trunk that was just about perfect. I gave it a brief once-over, including opening it to check the interior. This was as close to exactly right as I was going to get.

“How much?”

“Eight irons, four coppers.”

Ouch. I let surprise show on my face, and didn’t move for a two-count. “That’s … uh …”

Steve became chagrined, realizing he’d overreached. “That is, of course, retail. However, it’s a slow day, so …”

I took the hint. “I have seven irons, six coppers.” I opened my hand to show him. “That’s all I have in the world. And I do need this item.”

Steve looked briefly relieved, then managed to suppress it. Apparently that was still above cost. “That will be acceptable.”

I handed him the money and took the trunk. It was a good thing he hadn’t dug in his heels. I might have spit up my remaining two irons just to see his expression.



The trunk had a nice lock on it, made of whatever insanely hard wood they used instead of metal. It could probably be forced by a determined thief, but the point was to not attract the attention of thieves in the first place. To that end, as soon as I was back to my tree, I started rubbing dirt on it to take the shine off. A few minutes’ attention got me a suitably grubby and time-worn trunk. Next, I harvested some dry grasses for cushioning and lined the inside.

When the preparations were all done, I climbed the tree and retrieved Bender. I removed the matrix from my much-maligned backpack, then placed it carefully in the trunk, making sure the organics were packed densely enough to not shift.

I spit out my one remaining spider and put it in the trunk with the matrix. The spider was my insurance policy. It would make some modifications to the trunk to make it harder to open or steal. And if worse came to worse, some thief was going to get a face-full of plasma cutter.

The backpack wasn’t looking good. The cube had stretched it, and I couldn’t be sure that it would spring back into normal shape. If not, I would stand out even without the matrix. I sighed, shook the backpack a few times, then put it on. I’d stand out more without one at all.

One last item to take care of.

“Hugh, you got a sec?”

“Sure, what’s up?”

“I’m about to apply to be a deckhand. Anything I need to know? Is there a guild or union?”

“No, not like what you mean. There’s a guild, but it’s mostly just for arbitration and setting rates. And you’re in it automatically if you work on a ship.”

“So there isn’t a problem with treatment of laborers?”

“These are Quinlans, Bob. They can live off the land. If someone started beating the deckhands, they’d just all swim away. If they didn’t outright disembowel the miscreant. Have you met Quinlans?”

“Mmm. Fair point. So they’re cantankerous, mobile, can find food anywhere, and can sleep anywhere.”

“Uh-huh. Kind of hard to develop an oppressed underclass in those circumstances.”

“What’s the pay?”

“A half-iron per day. If someone tries to offer you below that, snarl and walk away.”

“Gotcha. Thanks.”

That was better than expected. Hugh had gotten a job right away, so I hadn’t really expected a problem, but any Bob would tell you that Murphy was a bitch.



I arrived at the riverfront, trunk slung over my shoulder, and headed for the docks. There were several boats tied up, but only one had any activity. Some pallets were being unloaded, and there was also some cargo waiting to be brought on board. It looked like my best bet, if only because the other two boats appeared to be deserted.

Still, I examined the two deserted vessels, frowning. They weren’t empty—there were some palleted boxes and bales—but it was odd that no one was about. However, Quinlan deckhands were swarming over the third boat, practically sprinting from job to job. I noted in passing that they weren’t wearing the almost ubiquitous Quinlan backpacks, although one Quinlan who was standing around screaming orders and invective in almost equal amounts was wearing what appeared to be a vest with pockets.

The Quinlan with the vest paused and spoke to me, guessing what was on my mind. “Part of the shipment’s late. We got lucky. We were here first, and signed for what was waiting. You looking for work?”

“I am. You hiring?”

She gestured at the boxes on the dock. “That fehg isn’t going to load itself. Although the lazy sots I already pay for no reason seem to be hoping it will.”

The Quinlans unloading the boat replied with pro forma insults and one Quinlan middle-finger equivalent. It seemed good-natured, though.

“Say the word and I’ll start hauling.”

“You got it. Get to work.”

Well, that was easier than I had any right to expect. There was no need to ask where they were going. Boats almost always went downstream unless they were very local, and on this river segment, downstream was east, toward the Garack’s Spine segment. “Can I drop off my trunk?”

She gestured to a corner of the boat, attention already on the next problem. I dropped off the trunk, and after a moment’s thought, took off my backpack as well.



Being a deckhand on a Quinlan boat was very much a strong back, weak mind kind of thing. Pick up box here, put box down there. Rinse, repeat. My manny was much stronger than a native, and I didn’t get tired, but overheating could be an issue, so I didn’t push it. Every once in a while the entire crew would take a fiver in the water to cool off, which told me I wasn’t the only one with that problem.

The work was accomplished with the minimum of conversation. We’d keep working until all the cargo was moved, so malingering of any kind was pointless. Everyone just wanted to get it done.

When the last box had been loaded, we parked our butts on the edge of the boat while the Quinlan in the vest, who turned out to be the captain, argued over the paperwork with the dockmaster.

“Welcome to the Hurricane,” one of the deckhands said. “I’m Oric. This is Ted, and this is Frieda.”

I was momentarily taken aback, and looked closely at Frieda. No, definitely not the same person. Same Quinlan name, though, which the translation software converted to the same English name.

“Enoki,” I replied. “Enoki Funguy.”

Oric looked mildly surprised. “A family name? And you’re deckhanding?”

“We are an old family,” I told him. “But we were never wealthy. My mother always told me, We’ve earned that name and you’ll damned well use it. Yes, mom.”

That got chuckles, but I wasn’t sure if my momentary flippancy hadn’t set me up for trouble. I’d forgotten that family names were little short of hereditary titles in Quinlan society. Had I just painted myself as a target? Well, I’d have to roll with it.

“We also have a paying passenger,” Ted volunteered. “He’s off shopping. Captain Lisa told him to be back before midday or he would have to find another ride. He’s cutting it pretty close.”

“He also has a last name,” Frieda added. “As he reminds us constantly. I’ve come close to opening his throat a couple of times. But the captain says we have to be polite to the paying passengers.” She made a face to indicate her opinion of the command.

Captain Lisa finished haranguing the dockmaster, and the two exchanged signatures. She marched up the ramp and glared around. “His highness not here? Oh well. He paid in advance. Let’s haul ass, people. We need to hit Melon Patch by nightfall.”

We jumped up and started releasing lines and pulling up boarding ramps. There wasn’t much to it, but I made a point of taking orders from the others without complaint or trying to improvise. Just as we were at the point of pushing away from the dock and raising sail, a fat Quinlan came puffing, yelling and waving one arm. The other arm was holding on to a trunk not unlike mine, except much newer looking.

Quinlans were fat by nature, resembling beavers more than otters in that respect. But this individual was fat even by Quinlan standards. And out of shape, to judge from the panting and gasping.

The captain growled under her breath but motioned us to lower one gangplank. The Quinlan put his trunk down, and trudged up the ramp, still trying to catch his breath. As he passed the captain, I heard him say, “Have someone retrieve the trunk, please.” The captain gave him a sour look but motioned to me.

I had a strong urge to accidentally drop it into the water, but I was in a uniquely bad position to get into a game of tit-for-tat. So I played it straight, bringing the trunk on board and depositing it with the other miscellaneous items, including my trunk. But I gave the translation software specific instructions for converting his name.

“So who is he?” I asked Ted.

“Snidely Whiplash. His family is big in the wine business. As near as I can tell, he’s just an entitled whelp, though.”

The beverage wasn’t exactly wine, but it was the result of fermenting some local fruit. And as with most alcohol, it was big business. I was no stranger to snot-nosed kids who thought their parents’ success made them a big deal. This voyage might end up being more difficult than anticipated.

With our passenger safely, if obnoxiously, aboard, we cast off. Ted and Frieda pulled up the sail and we wallowed majestically out of port. The Hurricane was basically a barge with a sail, and it had all the racing feel appropriate to the design. I began to wonder if we’d make it to the end of the segment. Speaking of which …

“Hey, Oric. Does the Hurricane jump segments?”

“If we’ve got the cargo to justify it. Otherwise we circle into the Arcadia River and head back to the other end. Lisa’s not one of these big-time operations with a set route. If you were to get on the Galway, they never leave this segment—just up and down each river, circling the world. It’s not a terrible life. If you want to head into the next segment, you can get off at High Peak. There will usually be a boat going through within a day or two. The Hamilton jumps segments—I think they’ll go three or four segments sometimes. Again, though, depends on cargo.”

“Have people around here ever named any of the segments?”

Oric shook his head. “It’s bad luck. You name your segment, you start to identify with it, almost like a nation; then you start to talk about borders and armies, and the next thing you know, you’ve been scattered as punishment.”

Frieda, having finished with the sails, had joined the group. “It’s not punishment, it’s—”

“Yes, I’ve heard your doctrine before, Frieda. It’s not for us to judge the Administrator.”

“I’m not judging, Oric, I’m discussing their motivation. And it does make a difference. Punishments escalate. Guidance doesn’t.”

We were interrupted by a snort from midships. “You yokels and your legends about gods and demons. It is to laugh.”

Frieda glared at Snidely, which didn’t dent the supercilious expression on his face in the slightest. “Legends? Are you defective? The Administrator is as much a fact of life as the weather. Or do you think rain is a myth, too?”

“Sure, he is. He makes the grass grow, lifts the little birds into the air, and makes the sun rise in the morning.”

I stared in disbelief. This buffoon apparently believed that Heaven’s River was a natural environment. I opened my mouth to correct him, then was overcome by the sheer irony of the situation. I was about to explain to an atheist that God was real. I wanted to face-palm, but that would create questions. Best let the regulars take it.

Oric and Frieda formed an unsteady alliance, arguing against Snidely’s amused intransigence. He was a classic case of Dunning-Kruger—so entrenched and confident in his ignorance that he didn’t even realize how much he didn’t know. I let the argument drone on in the background while I watched the shoreline drift by. As enjoyable as the days on the river with my friends had been, there was a lot to be said for the sailor lifestyle as well.

The argument had escalated to the point where it attracted the captain’s attention, though. “Enough!” she yelled. “There’s decks to be cleaned, the bilge needs pumping, the cargo still hasn’t been tarped, and the spinnaker still hasn’t been raised. Make yourselves useful!”

Well, that was that. And Snidely took this turn of events as a victory, to judge from the pleased expression on his face.



The next couple of days were uneventful. We got caught in a brief downpour, which elicited howls of complaint from Snidely. Why a creature that was designed for water should hate rain was beyond me. But then again, the family dog used to be on a first-name basis with every puddle and stream in our neighborhood but would feign death when we tried to bathe her. Go figure.

I continued to avoid interaction with Snidely. The other three seemed to be able to keep his attention. Oric and Frieda had called a truce over their minor doctrinal differences in order to form common cause against the infidel.

I was going to have to discuss this with Bridget. It seemed the Administrator was taking on the aspects of a formal belief system, complete with competing dogma. Against that was a version of atheism that didn’t so much pit science against religion as simply refuse to go along. I wondered what Snidely’s cosmology would look like, but having to talk to him would be too high a price to pay to find out.



We pulled into a town that Ted informed me was named Beetle Juice. No, I’m not kidding, nor did I tweak the translator. It turned out this town’s major industry was a form of liquor made from the excretions of some insect. First, blech! Second, it made me wonder, not for the first time, if there was some form of sense of humor involved, either from the Skippies or from the software itself. I decided to let the translation stand and assigned it to the beverage as well.

Beetle Juice was the last town on the Nirvana before the segment mountains. The captain would decide in the next day or two if we’d be continuing downriver or catching the transfer tributary to go back the other way. A lot would depend on what cargo we could get, and where it would be the most valuable.

It depended on paying passengers, too. If people were willing to pay to get to a particular destination, that would affect the captain’s decision. Which made me wonder where Snidely was going. If we weren’t going in the right direction for him, this would be goodbye. I tried to summon a tear and failed miserably.

As we got closer, I could see that there was considerable activity at the docks, and it didn’t seem to be all from the usual dock business. Four or five cargo ships were tied up, while their crews had what appeared to be loud, bellicose discussions with official-looking individuals wearing sashes and swords.

I felt a sinking feeling in my stomach. It seemed unlikely that this had anything to do with me, but by this point any indication of cops made me as jumpy as a two-bit thief.

Captain Lisa hopped around on deck, yelling orders at us, trying to maneuver the Hurricane into a tight space along the dock. This also involved a shouting match with the dockhands, which just added to the general holiday atmosphere. But eventually, we were at dock and tied up properly.

Ted and I grabbed the gangplank and started maneuvering it onto the dock. Before it had even settled, a delegation of cops marched up the plank. Captain Lisa moved to intercept them.

“We are searching for a fugitive who may be taking transport downriver,” the sergeant said. “We will need to inspect your ship.”

“What, all our cargo? Are you kidding me? Do you have any idea how long it’ll take?”

The sergeant shook his head. “No, no, we’re concerned about one specific individual carrying what appears to be a funerary box in his backpack.”

Uh-oh. Chances that there were two such fugitives on a billion-mile-long megastructure? Pretty low. I tensed and started planning escape routes before I remembered that I no longer resembled Bob. And I was not wearing a backpack at the moment.

“We will also need to inspect personal luggage.”

Aw, shit.

“You will like hell!” Snidely exclaimed, striding up and sticking out his chest.

“And who might you be?” The cop glared at him and put a hand on his sword.

“I am Snidely Whiplash, of the Whiplash family. You’ve no doubt enjoyed our wine on many occasions. We can bring considerable pressure to bear if our family name is insulted.”

The cop was taken aback. No doubt dealing with powerful families, especially belligerent powerful families, was considerably above his pay grade.

After a moment the cop replied, “Yes sir, understood. Obviously, you would not be a suspect in any case. Your luggage is where?”

Snidely casually waved a hand in the direction of the miscellaneous pile. “See that it isn’t touched.”

As I followed Snidely’s hand wave, I got an idea. As casually as I could, I moved in the direction of the pile where our trunks were located. I began to untie the tarp covering the trunks and other small items. As I gathered it, I surreptitiously wiped off my trunk as much as I could. It still ended up looking more travel-worn than Snidely’s but not by much.

A couple of cops came over, evidently pleased with my cooperation, and started looking over the pile.

“Those are Mr. Whiplash’s trunks,” I said, pointing to the two items. “Everything else is just cargo.”

One of the cops nodded to me, and they began randomly opening boxes. “How many people aboard?” one said to me.

“Captain Lisa, Ted, Frieda, Oric, myself, and Mr. Whiplash. We’re all on deck.” I pointed to each individual as I named them.

“None matches the description,” the other cop said. “And this is just junk,” he added, waving at the boxes.

“I’m sure the captain would disagree,” I replied with a small smile.

The cop snorted and they moved back to the gangplank. One shook his head at the sergeant.

A few seconds of discussion with Captain Lisa, and the cops trooped away. Letting out a breath, I re-tarped the miscellaneous pile. As I straightened up after tying the last bight, I found Snidely gazing at me, a slight frown on his face. As casually as possible, I gave the tarp a tug and walked off to my next chore.

But any attention from anyone was bound to be a bad thing. I would have to keep an eye on His Bigness.



As it turned out, we would be crossing segments. Two passengers signed on, wanting to go in that direction. And the captain was able to subcontract on a shipment to Orchard Hill, just on the other side of the mountains. Subcontracting wasn’t as potentially profitable as hauling our own goods, but it was a no-risk payday. And a couple of paying passengers was just bonus.

The passengers, a very old Quinlan and her granddaughter, were heading back to the family home. Theresa was far too old to endure any kind of extended swim, so Belinda had swum upstream several hundred miles to take her home.

Quinlans had a strong reverence for the elderly, so the captain didn’t balk at all when we set up a comfortable area in the sun for Theresa. Even Snidely didn’t seem inclined to complain.

Belinda doted on her grandmother but wasn’t otherwise talkative. She was friendly, but she would never use two words when a gesture or a grunt would do. On the few occasions that she did have to speak full sentences, she seemed to be almost out of practice. Remembering Bridget’s comments about breeding away from tool-user intelligence, I wondered if this might be a sign of that. Or maybe she just wasn’t a talker.

Once they were settled in, we went through the by-now-routine frenetic running around that characterized leaving port. The cargo we’d taken on at Beetle Juice, which was mostly beetle juice (no surprise), was making the Hurricane wallow a little more than usual, so we were taking extra care to maintain a good, conservative trim.

Once the boat was in mid-river and running an easy reach, we were able to break for lunch. I jumped in with the other crew members, and we chased down some juicy fish. Yum. Unfortunately, given the close quarters, I had to be seen to be eating, sleeping, and so on, just like everyone else. So, fish for breakfast, fish for lunch … When I was done with the Bender rescue, I resolved that I would never go near fish again.

We brought up a dozen or so as well for the captain and passengers. I sat down with Theresa and Belinda, studiously ignoring Snidely who was snarfing back fish like he hadn’t been fed in weeks. The Pav would have approved of his table manners. My mother, not so much.

Belinda quietly removed the less desirable fish parts with a small, but doubtless expensive, knife and offered the fillets to her grandmother, who took them with a smile.

“Belinda’s not much for talking,” Theresa said to me. “I’ve watched you try to engage her in conversation.” She placed a fond hand on her descendant’s head. “Kids are getting less and less verbal, it seems.”

“I have a friend who commented that it’s less necessary in Heaven’s River, so intelligence is being gradually bred out.”

“With some help from the Administrator? I’ve heard that theory. Not impossible, but their manipulation would have to be very subtle—”

“Oh, in Father’s name, more yokel superstition,” said Snidely. “Save me from the uneducated.”

Theresa gave him a mild stare. “And what’s your educational background, Mr. Whiplash?”

“I have a master’s in business from the University of Peachland,” he replied haughtily. I checked the translator out of curiosity. That wasn’t bad. Close enough to retain the meaning anyway, although I doubted that a master’s had quite the same meaning as a human university degree.

“And you took classes at Peachland?” Theresa asked.

“Of course.”

“I taught courses at Peachland, Mr. Whiplash. Don’t talk down to me. I have several doctorates, in subjects much more relevant than How to Count Money for those who’ve had their life handed to them.”

Whoa. Snidely jerked back, and I imagined flames sparking at the end of his whiskers. As much as I disliked him, obvious glee wouldn’t be helpful, so I maintained a stone face as he stood stiffly.

“That would have been very handy, I suppose, before senility set in,” he said, showing his canines.

Belinda turned on him, snarled, and extended her claws. Snidely jumped back, surprised and alarmed by her reaction.

“You’re a small man with a small, shriveled soul, Mr. Whiplash,” Theresa said. “There is no bigger waste than a formal education given to someone incapable of using it. I have no doubt your whole life would disappear into your father’s accomplishments without leaving a ripple.”

Snidely glared at her for a moment, totally silenced, before stalking off.

“That went well,” I said.

Theresa chuckled. “And what about you, Mr. Funguy? You have a last name as well. Do you have anything to show for it?”

“Not really. My family earned the name long ago. Nowadays it’s mostly useful for keeping people like Snidely from patronizing me too much.”

“Do you believe, as Mr. Whiplash apparently does, that the world came about naturally?”

“Of course not,” I replied. “It’s a rotating structure, one hundred henn in radius, composed of segments each one thousand henn in length. The ratio is clearly artificial. The experiment to determine the rotational period is something we did in our first-year classes. It’s exactly what you’d need in order to generate .86 G.” I was taking a chance showing any scientific chops, but I wanted Theresa to approve of me. Not just because she appeared to have a ferocious intellect, but also because I might learn something useful. This could turn out to be the first truly useful encounter since we’d landed.

She nodded slowly. “Ah. An engineer? A frustrating occupation, I imagine. So much of what you know you could do is forbidden.”

“And what did you teach, Theresa?”

“Philosophy. Math. History.” She smiled sadly. “That last item is particularly frustrating. Even in my lifetime, I’ve watched people letting go of some of the more difficult aspects of Quinlan history, in favor of myth, belief in the Administrator as a supernatural deity of some kind, and just-so stories.”

Jackpot. Maybe I’d finally get a complete picture of the history of Heaven’s River. “So what do you think the Administrator—”

The captain’s voice cut through everything. “All right you lazy sots. This tub won’t steer itself. Are you going to leave that mess on the deck forever? Do I pay you to sun yourselves? Hop to it!”

I sighed. Lunch ten minutes was over.



The next day’s topic was life after death. Oric and Frieda, no surprise, had opinions that tended toward the mystical. Theresa, bless her heart, didn’t mock or condescend, but she did ask questions that they found very hard to handle. During a lull, while Oric and Frieda were regrouping, she turned to me. “You’ve been quiet, Enoki. Don’t have an opinion?”

I chuckled. “That’ll be the day. I guess the real problem is defining what you mean by life after death.”

“I would have thought it was self-explanatory.”

“The supernatural version, sure. Also unprovable, at least so far. But what about a more, erm, science-oriented version?” I launched into a highly abbreviated explanation of replication. When I was done, Oric and Frieda looked equal parts confused and appalled.

“That’s not the same,” Frieda exclaimed. “That’s just a copy of you.”

“But if original you isn’t around anymore, it sure beats the alternative,” I replied with a grin.

Theresa laughed. “And to anyone else, it might make no difference. If a copy of me loved to chase my grandchildren around and remembered everyone’s birthdays, how would you tell it wasn’t original me?”

“But it wouldn’t be!”

“There’s a postulate in information theory that information can’t be destroyed,” I said slowly. I was sticking my neck out; I knew it. I watched myself doing it and couldn’t stop. This might be well beyond what Quinlans had managed to retain. “And in philosophy, there’s something called a Closest Continuer, which according to some thought, actually would be you. Even if there was a gap.”

Theresa gave me a quizzical look. “I can get the definition of Closest Continuer from context, but I’d love to hear more about this bit about information theory.”

There were groans from the others. It appeared advanced physics was not a popular subject.



I was in my VR library, studying some of the blueprints of Heaven’s River produced from scans by the Skippies and Gamers, when I received an alert from my manny’s AMI.

Sentry roamer reports disturbance.

That meant someone or something was disturbing my trunk. I quickly entered my manny and climbed quietly to my feet. It was full night, and Ted was on watch. The ersatz starlight was enough to illuminate the shore if we got too close. But it generally wasn’t a problem, as the current and wind tended to keep the boat in the middle of the river. Ted would wake us up if some emergency navigation became necessary.

Meanwhile, we had a small lantern on bow and stern, just enough to mark our position for any other boats, but not enough to affect night-adapted eyes. Of course, that didn’t matter for a manny equipped with real night vision.

Someone had peeled back part of the tarp and was bent over the trunks. Someone with a, shall we say, extra-wide silhouette. I walked quietly up behind Snidely and whispered, “It’s locked, asshole.”

He jerked up and turned to face me. “Very well-locked, it would seem. Better than mine, which appears to be the same quality.”

Huh. He’d just out-and-out admitted he was trying to break into my trunk. Probably a punchline of some kind was coming. “Is there a point, Snidely? Other than that you’re a thief?”

He smirked back at me. “Well, Enoki, I happened to be watching when we pulled into Beetle Juice. It was very impressive how you managed to get them to not inspect your trunk.”

I frowned. “How so? They didn’t inspect either trunk.”

“But I ordered them not to inspect mine. You tricked them into thinking I had two trunks.”

“I didn’t do anything except pull off the tarp, Snidely. They made an assumption. Should I have begged them to please open my trunk? I notice you didn’t volunteer.”

“Very glib, Enoki. Tell you what, since it’s all so innocent, why don’t you open your trunk for me?”

“You first.”

“My trunk,” he said haughtily, “is not under suspicion.”

“Neither is mine, dumbass. Meanwhile, I found you trying to break into my property, which gives me the right to defend it. So here’s the thing.” I stepped up until my beak was right up against his. “If I catch you trying that or anything similar again, I will rip off your head and shit down your neck. We clear?”

Snidely stepped back, clearly not prepared for the level of implied violence I was projecting. “I will tell the captain you threatened me—”

“I will tell the captain you are a thief. I wonder which one of us will be tossed off the boat?”

He glared for a few more seconds, then turned and stalked off.

But I knew this wasn’t over. Not by a long shot.





17. Trolling for Treasure

Bill

August 2334

Virt, Pits of Paebak

The troll lay at my feet, sliced in two, the halves neatly cauterized. I cleaned my sword—carefully—and re-sheathed it. I’d gotten the flame blade and some enchanted armor in exchange for the staff of fireballs and most of my portion of Gargh’s hoard. It had been a fair trade in that both myself and Saruman the Wise claimed we’d been fleeced. Still, neither of us backed out of the deal.

Our dungeon party was currently creeping along a dark hallway in the Pits of Paebak. When asked about the name, the current DM would only smile mysteriously and say that all would be made clear at the conclusion of the campaign. Which probably meant a bad pun or something was in our future.

Kevin was back as his original character, having left behind just enough identifiable pieces to allow a resurrection. Gandalf had used one of his scrolls, after taking all Kevin’s remaining worldly goods in payment. Kevin seemed to have finally gotten over the loss of his staff, thankfully. I hadn’t been subjected to any more glares, at least. Tim, who hadn’t left anything but floating ash, was back as a first-level thief. He was staying in the center of the group until he levelled up enough to not be killed by an inadvertent sneeze.

Verne, Pete, and I provided the muscle and sharp implements. So far, we’d been able to handle the encounters, but the increasing difficulty sent a pretty clear message that we were getting close to the payoff.

Gandalf strode along just behind me, acting like king of the mountain. I hoped his talents matched up to his attitude. He was remarkably closemouthed about his actual abilities and assets.

“That was a troll,” Tim said unnecessarily.

We turned to look at him. “And?” Verne said.

“Pretty hefty monster for this level of dungeon,” Tim answered. “If not for Bill’s flame blade, I’m not sure we’d have been able to take it down. Not without losing another player or two anyway.”

I looked back in the direction of the troll carcass. Tim was right. I’d gotten too used to being able to cleave just about anything with one swipe. But trolls were, generally speaking, more than a handful.

“Are you suggesting we’re being set up?” Gandalf asked. “Anyone made any enemies lately?”

I glanced at Kevin, who gazed back at me innocently. That was a long shot anyway. If Kevin was that sensitive about losing treasure, he’d never make it as a Gamer. Everyone else was looking around at everything and nothing as they considered their own recent pasts.

“There’s a secret door here.”

We all turned at Tim’s comment. He was poking at a random section of wall.

“You sure?”

“It’s about the only thing I’m good for,” Tim replied. “Why do you think I picked this character class?”

“Fair enough,” I said. “Let’s see if we can crack this.”

We all started poking, twisting, pushing, lifting and pulling every protuberance in the area. A few seconds later, a door opened with the typical stone-grinding sound effect, revealing a pitch-black tunnel.

“That looks dark,” Tim said. “And cramped.” He pulled a copper piece out of a pocket and tossed it into the blackness. There was a dull thump, followed by a metallic tinkle.

“Uh …”

“Yeah. Something’s in there. Anyone got a light spell? Or a flashlight?”

We needn’t have bothered. Whether we woke it up with the coin toss, or it simply decided it had lost the element of surprise, the demon hound charged out of the tunnel, straight at Verne. He, a battle-hardened, fearless half-dwarf warlord, went rigid with fear. Seriously. The hound knocked him over like hitting an inflatable Bozo the Clown.

Apparently, the hound had been expecting more resistance than Bozo had been able to deliver. It continued on in its trajectory, speed unabated, and fetched up against the far wall with a loud thump. The hound made an oddly human “oof” noise and slid down the wall to land in a heap.

Pete, who hadn’t gone rigid, took the opportunity to impale the beast before it could get up. As the light went out of the hound’s eyes, Pete smiled and said, “About time I got a good kill—”

The second demon hound hit him at neck height, taking his head clean off. “Shit!” his head said as it bounced along the floor. I finally unfroze, pulled my sword, and parted the hound cleanly.

“Well, that’s suboptimal,” Gandalf said. He grabbed Pete’s head by the helmet crest and lifted it until they were face to face. “No resurrections, buddy. Even if you could afford it, I used my last scroll for Kevin.”

Pete’s head said, “Yeah, okay. I was getting tired of this character anyway.”

The conversation was interrupted by a heavy bass growl ahead of us in the hallway.

“What the blinkin’ blue blazes was that?” Kevin whispered.

Tim replied, “Dunno, but it had a certain quality of bigness to it.”

“And hungriness,” I added.

Tim peered into the tunnel. “I think we’re being herded, but it’s this or go straight back. I kinda wish you still had that staff, Bill.”

I shook my head in reply. “Firing it off in that cramped space would as likely as not cook all of us with the blowback. Gandalf, you got anything for close-order fighting?”

“Not like what you mean, Bill. I think your flame blade is our best hope.”

“Wonderful.” This meant I would be going first, holding my magic sword out in front of me in hopes of killing an attacker before it could get to us. Which would do diddly squat against a magical attack. My future began to truncate in front of me.

I shrugged and edged carefully into the tunnel. “Someone want to shed some light on this?”

Gandalf muttered something and a light shone over my shoulder, illuminating the tunnel ahead. The tunnel wasn’t high enough for us to stand straight, so we were forced to move forward bent at the waist. If I’d been bio and doing this in real, I would have had back spasms within a minute or two; but in the spirit of classic D&D, the game engine allowed us to overlook some of the more realistic aspects of adventuring.

The tunnel eventually terminated in a blank wall. We all turned to Tim, who shrugged. “I don’t see anything.”

“I’m getting tired of this campaign,” Verne muttered. “We’ve been battling high-level beasts since almost the entrance, lost over half our group, and we have sweet diddly to show for it.”

“Hopefully the final payday is worth it.” Gandalf checked through his satchel. “I have a spell of True Seeing in here somewhere … Ah.” He pulled out a small notebook and paged through it. A few seconds of nodding and muttering and he looked up. “Let’s try this.”

Gandalf made some gestures and spoke in an arcane tongue. He then squinted and peered intently around, checking the blank wall and the tunnel wall around it. “Nothing. What the hell?”

We all stared at the blank wall. Red herrings were one thing, but dead ends generally needed to have a point. “I’m really starting to hate this DM,” Tim said, and turned around to head back up the tunnel. He took three steps, then said, “Really, really, really hate.”

We looked past him at the blank wall where a tunnel used to be. We were now in a section of tunnel about twenty feet long, blocked at both ends.

I frowned. “Gandalf, is your True Seeing spell still active?”

“Yes, for another minute or so.”

“See anything in this tunnel we should know about?”

“Nope.”

“What blocks or counters a True Seeing?”

“Er … higher level magic, of course. But I’d sense that.”

“Tim, you see anything significant?”

“No. And a True Seeing would pick it … hold on.” Tim put his hand near a section of wall. “There’s a draft here.”

We moved over to it and each took a turn feeling for the slight air flow.

“On the list of things that defeat a True Seeing,” Gandalf opined, “we can add low-tech tricks like building a wall without mortar.” He pushed on the section of wall and it gave a little.

We all put our backs into it, and after a few seconds of resistance, the wall collapsed outward.

The good news is that it crushed several of the zombies who were waiting on the other side. The bad news is that it alerted all of their still-uncrushed brethren. We were at one end of a large subterranean hall with a ceiling so high it was lost in the gloom. Torches lined the walls, giving enough light to illuminate dozens of zombies milling around the chamber, and a large nondescript statue at least twenty feet tall standing at the center.

“Oh shit,” Tim exclaimed, and backpedaled frantically.

“Brainssssss …” said the zombies, and advanced on us.

“Now hold on,” Verne exclaimed. “That’s entirely the wrong kind of—”

“Shut up, Verne,” Gandalf growled. “Kill now, carp later.”

I raised my sword and started swinging. Perhaps a little too enthusiastically, as Verne yelled, “Hey, watch it!” and danced out of the way.

Without Pete, we were down to two fighter characters. Even with magical accessories, Verne and I wouldn’t be able to hold off a bunch of undead. “If you’ve got anything in that bag of tricks, Gandalf, now would be the time,” I yelled.

“Gimme a sec,” he yelled back. I could hear muttered curses, then “Aha!”

There was a pop and a zombie that was trying to eat Verne’s axe turned into a cloud of smelly gas.

My eyebrows went up, but I didn’t have time to think about it. Zombies weren’t particularly powerful opponents, but they made up for it with sheer numbers and a total lack of fear. And they were very hard to kill. You generally had to reduce them to sushi before they’d stop coming at you. And I had at least a dozen of the critters about to step into range. I cocked my sword arm, and—

Pop, pop, pop.

“Woo-hoo!” Gandalf yelled. The sudden disappearance of several zombies gave me time for a quick glance over my shoulder. Gandalf was gesturing with a wand. Each time he pointed it, there was another pop.

“Damn, that’s handy,” Verne said, and chopped another couple of zombies.

“Bibbety boppety boo,” Gandalf replied, dancing around and waving his wand. “Bibbety boppety bibbety boppety pibbety boppety boo!” With each downbeat, another zombie went up in smoke. The odor was verging on overpowering, and the game engine wouldn’t let me turn down my olfactory sense.

We were down to the last dregs of the zombies, and I was beginning to think we might survive this, when a huge hand reached out of nowhere and wrapped around me. I found myself hoisted into the air, unable to draw a breath.

The last few zombies disappeared with popping sounds, and Gandalf stopped the song and dance routine. Strangely, I don’t think anyone had noticed my predicament until that moment, judging from the shocked expressions. “Little help?” I managed to squeak.

“Hello, wabbit,” a voice said from behind us. Verne and Gandalf turned—I couldn’t move, but the huge hand helpfully rotated me to face the voice—to find Kevin grinning at me, holding a scroll. “Golem,” he explained, waving the scroll. The helpful hand turned me around again, and I was finally able to see what I’d previously assumed was a statue. A twenty-foot-tall clay-colored humanoid shape stared back at me impassively with a face surprisingly reminiscent of Odo from DS9. It loosened its grip slightly so that I could more easily breathe and talk.

Kevin put the scroll into a pocket and I reflexively struggled. No joy, of course. He didn’t have to hold the scroll to control the golem, just possess it. And golems, besides being almost indestructible, were hella strong.

Kevin walked a little ways to the side to put some distance between himself and the rest of the group, still smirking triumphantly but not saying anything. It looked like he was going to wait for us to ask the first question.

“What’s going on, Kevin?” Verne asked obligingly.

Kevin gestured at me. “Bill here. First time in a campaign, he goes from dragon fodder to a level above me by basically tripping over himself. Does practically nothing and comes out golden.”

“Plus I took your staff of fireballs. I’m sure that figures into it.”

Kevin glared at me. “You needed to be taken down a peg, bud.” He directed nasty grin my way. “So I set up this campaign and made sure you were invited.”

“You played and DMed?” Gandalf exclaimed.

“No, I’ve got a friend running the show. I’m just what you might call a—”

“Backstabber,” Verne finished for him.

“Whatever. None of you have anything that can take out a golem. Enjoy your deaths, courtesy of Bill. And speaking of Bill …” Kevin raised a hand and made a squeezing motion.

I waited for the end, hoping the sensory feedback filter was set way high, but nothing happened. Kevin got a perplexed look on his face and repeated the motion. Still nothing. Kevin reached into his pocket, and the concerned expression changed to panic.

“Looking for this?”

We all turned at Tim’s voice. He was leaning up against the wall, casually flipping a scroll in his hand.

Oh, yeah, that’s right. Thief.

“You truly are an asshole, Kevin,” Tim said, and opened his other hand. The golem dropped me, then reached out, grabbed Kevin around the head, and squeezed. There was a pop sound, not the least bit like a zombie exploding, and squishy juice squirted from the top of the golem’s fist.

Verne bent over and retched.

“Oh GOD!” Gandalf exclaimed. “Did you have to do that?”

Tim grimaced in sympathy. “Okay, maybe not my best move. However …” He held up the Golem Scroll. “I appear to be in possession of one kick-ass piece of magic. I feel some levelling-up in my future. Let’s see what else we can find.”

We grinned at each other. Another successful campaign.



I’d invited myself over to Gandalf’s VR again, and he was eyeing me suspiciously. Maybe he was expecting another lecture on the Gamers’ involvement in the expedition. But that wasn’t what I was worried about this time.

“So, about Kevin. That’s not Bob-like behavior. How far has he drifted, anyway?”

Gandalf shrugged. “He’s actually one of my descendants. I could ask him, but off the cuff I’d say he’s about twenty-fourth generation. So it shouldn’t be a surprise that he’s drifted a lot.”

“Bit of an asshole. A vindictive one, at that.”

“Yeah, listen Bill, I get why the whole drift thing bothers the senior Bobs. But you need to appreciate that, from our point of view, it’s more upside than otherwise.”

Well, that was interesting. I raised my eyebrows and made a rolling motion with a hand for him to continue.

“When we first started the Gamers group, most of us were still mostly Bob-like, and frankly it was a little boring. Everyone wanted to be a magic user, the dungeons tended to all feature intellectual puzzles, everything was carefully balanced … all very civilized. Now …” Gandalf made a helpless gesture. “Nowadays, you can’t always depend on your fellow players, sometimes crazy shit happens—like today—and sometimes things go wildly out of control. Campaigns are way more fun these days. Also, we are now getting non-Bob replicants joining up from some of the post-life replicant arcologies.”

“What, seriously? Who?”

“No one today. This was all Bobs. But a couple of guys from your last time out were ex-human. Interesting that you didn’t notice.”

“Huh.” Well, he had a point. “So Kevin—”

“Is going to suffer a loss of reputation, but not so much for the attempted backstabbing as for failing at it. We’ll still let him join campaigns. We just won’t let him stand behind us, if you know what I mean.”

I chuckled and shook my head. “You’re right. It’s too easy to get myopic and see everything from the point of view of my own priorities. And that’s going to become an increasingly dangerous habit. I think I have to make an effort to start seeing everyone as individuals.” I stood. “Thanks, Gandalf. For the game, and for the lesson.”

He was still smiling when I popped out.





18. Trouble with Snidely

Bob

August 2334

Nirvana River System

It was kind of a good news/better news thing. The good news was that Snidely was now avoiding me. The better news was that everyone else had noticed and was actively hanging around me. I wondered why I hadn’t thought of this tactic when I was alive.

We were on our lunch break and were once again sitting around the fish bowl. By which I mean bowl of fish. Yum.

We’d gotten onto the concept of morality, and Frieda had just asked Theresa how she could have any sense of morality without a deity to define what was or was not moral. And as usual, I was having to grit my teeth to avoid doing a face-palm, which wasn’t a Quinlan expression. They didn’t seem to have a direct equivalent, either, or I’d have used it by now.

“What deities give you aren’t rules of morality,” Theresa responded. “They’re just rules. Do this and you’ll be rewarded. Do that and you’ll be punished. That’s how we teach our pets not to relieve themselves in the house. One would hope that true morality involved more than learning not to poop on the rug by being rapped on the nose.”

I remembered that small animal Garfield had seen wearing the cone of shame. It seemed pet behavior was another universal.

“In fact,” Theresa continued, “I believe that it is only possible to acquire true morality without input from a deity. It is only when you do something because you believe it is the right thing to do, instead of because of any moral desserts, that you are acting morally. Likewise, it is only when you refuse to do something because of the Golden Rule, rather than because of a threat of punishment, that you are behaving in a moral manner.”

“Ah,” I piped up. “The Golden Rule. Treat others as you’d like to be treated.”

Theresa gave me a perplexed look. “No, that’s the Silver Rule.”

“What?” Had I missed something?

“There are three rules of behavior,” Theresa replied, now in lecture mode. “The Iron Rule: Treat others less powerful than you however you like. The Silver Rule: Treat others as you’d like to be treated. The Golden Rule: Treat others as they’d like to be treated.”

“Huh. I had not heard that.”

Theresa frowned at me. “Seems like an odd gap. How far away is your home? Maybe they need a missionary visit.”

“From an atheist?” Frieda said archly.

“Wait …” I gestured at Frieda with an upheld hand. Then to Theresa, “How is that better?”

“If I treat you how I want to be treated, I’m not taking into account your desires.” Theresa made an imploring gesture. “If you are a Unitist and can’t eat land meat, but land meat is my favorite, the Silver Rule says I’m behaving morally by offering you a steak if you’re hungry. But of course you won’t eat it and in fact may be offended. So the Silver Rule is still to a large extent about me and my desires. However, with the Golden Rule, I am obligated to take into account your beliefs and preferences when deciding how best to behave toward you. Does this not produce a better result?”

“Huh,” I said. Again. Not sounding very smart, Bob. “I’ll have to think about that.”

Theresa smiled. “That’s the best sentence any teacher could hear.”

“But,” Frieda interjected, “you could believe literally anything, and there’s no way to decide which is right—”

“Shall we just sail right past port, then?” Captain Lisa’s voice washed over us. Damn, she had presence. I wondered if captains practiced that kind of yelling. “Maybe we should just sail into the rocks, then? Perhaps when you have a few seconds, you could steer this Mother-be-damned tub?”

Once again, lunch ten minutes was over.



We pulled into Orchard Hill without incident. As soon as the gangplank was in place, Snidely stalked down it and away, cutting in front of the captain. He wasn’t carrying his trunk, so unfortunately, he’d probably be back. And Captain Lisa would likely have a few things to say to him.

The captain and the dockmaster got into the usual spitting and shouting match, which, as usual, terminated with work for us. We began hauling boxes off the Hurricane and stacking them on a low-slung cart specifically designed for this.

It was mindless work and allowed me to think. I’d been on the move for a week and had traversed a segment. Assuming that was a reasonable speed, I’d be a month and a half getting to Garack’s Spine. Maybe a little more, since I’d also have to move from the Nirvana back to the Arcadia. Maybe I could get on a boat that crossed as part of their regular route.

I was interrupted in my ruminations by something undefinable. There’s a particular sound, or maybe a change to the normal background, that happens when cops show up. It’s subtle, but it’s enough to make you stop and look.

Coming down the dock was Snidely, talking animatedly to one of four cops. I doubted that he was trying to get them to check the Hurricane’s boating license. Assuming they had such things.

Snidely marched straight up to me, and with triumph in his voice, said, “This one.”

The cop, presumably the ranking officer, examined me, head slightly cocked. “Doesn’t match the description.” He sighed. “Nevertheless, we’re here.” He motioned me to precede him up the gangplank.

“What’s going on?” Captain Lisa demanded. She placed herself in front of the spokescop, blocking his path.

He gestured to Snidely. “This gentleman has accused this man of being the fugitive who is currently being sought through several segments.”

“Based on the fact that he tried to break into my trunk and I threatened him,” I said.

“And why would he be trying to break into your trunk?”

“You’ve known him for five minutes. Tell me honestly if that doesn’t seem in character.”

The cop said nothing, but his face took on the stony cast that meant someone was trying to suppress a facial expression. After a moment, he sighed. “Nevertheless, we’re here, and Mr. Whiplash is from a Family.” He turned to the captain. “You can refuse to let me on board. But the dockmaster can also refuse to continue to load and unload. Your choice.”

Captain Lisa gave Snidely a murderous glare before replying to the sergeant. “You have permission. He does not.” She turned to Ted. “Bring Mr. Whiplash’s trunk down.”

Snidely smiled at her. “Big deal. I’ll have another ride by the end of the day.”

“But it won’t be with us,” the captain replied. “And the shipping community is small and tight-knit. Don’t be too sure of your options.” She pulled her vest pocket open and rummaged for a moment, producing two coins. “Here’s the balance of your fare.” She threw the coins to the ground at Snidely’s feet.

I’ll give Snidely credit—he ignored the coins. He also dealt her a glare that made her previous salvo look like a love-fest. If people had started shooting lightning bolts from their eyes, it wouldn’t have surprised me.

The coins rolled a short distance, and a couple of spectators pounced on them. The sergeant gave Captain Lisa a look that might have been sympathy, then turned back to me and gestured again to the plank.

We passed Ted on his way back, carrying Snidely’s trunk. A brief glance assured me that he hadn’t gotten the wrong one.

The tarp had been stripped back and left off. I pulled my trunk from the pile, placed it flat, and unlocked it. The cop reached forward and opened the lid to reveal … stuff. A folded vest, some small tools, several books, a miniature ceramic figure, and a diary and writing implements. He pushed a few items around, frowned, then frowned at me. “This is just common goods. Why did you not just show him this?”

“Would you have, if that pompous ass demanded it of you?”

The cop snorted. “No, not likely. I think Mr. Whiplash is going have some explaining to do. Wasting the constabulary’s time is not without consequence. My apologies for the trouble.”

I smiled and nodded, and the cops marched back to the dock. I imagined a sharp and hopefully not short conversation in Snidely’s future. I glanced at the shipping container that currently held Bender’s matrix instead of these random items. I’d have to swap things back tonight, as that particular container was destined for the next stop.



“What a putz,” Ted said.

I grinned and pushed the fish bowl toward him. “Yeah, but did you see the look on his face as they marched him up the dock? I think he’s going to have an interesting afternoon.”

Theresa accepted a fillet from Belinda and chewed thoughtfully on it for a few seconds. “Sadly, he will probably have many children.”

We all chuckled. Harvey, our new deckhand, said, “It sounds like I missed an interesting time. I’ve had to deal with obnoxious passengers before. Never fun.”

Theresa turned to me. “So, Enoki, tell me more about utilitarianism.”

There were groans from the others. It turned out that dislike for moral philosophy transcended species.



Frieda was holding the night watch again. That helped, as I’d spent time last night working out her routine. Now I had to switch back the contents of my trunk and the shipping container. But, you know, night vision.

I had both containers open and had moved the miscellaneous items back into the shipping box. I held up Bender’s matrix and was about to place it carefully in the organics that formed my trunk’s padding, when a voice behind me said, “That’s very pretty. What is it?”

I whirled, almost fumbling the matrix, to find Theresa smiling at me. “Uhhhh …” I said.

“It is about the size of a funerary box. And since you took steps to hide it, I have to assume some level of guilt, if that’s the right word.”

Well, this was just peachy beyond belief. Would I have to kill Theresa? Could I even do that? What were my alternatives?

“You’re not from around here, are you, Enoki?”

“None of us are, Theresa.”

She laughed. “You know what I mean. You’re not a native Quinlan, at least not a resident of Heaven’s River, like the rest of us. Are you even a Quinlan at all?”

“What an odd question. What else would I be?”

“Well, you’d be someone who knows about things like utilitarianism and Closest Continuers, which I’d never heard of, but not about the Three Rules, which every child learns. And you’re someone who thinks the gravity in Heaven’s River is .86 G instead of one G. Where are you from that the gravity is 1.16 G?”

Oh. Bugger. I remembered that conversation. I’d assumed the translator would convert my statement, but apparently not. Well, that was just a huge, steaming, smelly pile of—

“I think you’re reading too much into an unconnected series of conversations, Theresa.”

“That would be a reasonable proposal, except for the thing in your hands. It appears to be metal. If it is, it’s enough metal to buy the entire segment. But you’re working as a deckhand. One of these things is not like the other, know what I mean?” She smiled at the last sentence.

“Uhhh …”

Theresa rolled her eyes. “You’re usually a bit more articulate than that, Enoki. Do you need a slap?”

I chortled. “No thanks, Teach. So, what are you going to do?”

“If I tried to call you out, would I survive?”

I closed my eyes briefly. “That would be the most effective way of dealing with the problem, and from a strictly utilitarian point of view, it might even pass muster. But no. I don’t work that way. I’d just run. And I’d have to take a chance on getting this wet.” I held up the matrix to illustrate.

“So you are the person they’re looking for?”

“I’m pretty sure. There’s always a possibility of coincidence, but I’m going to guess that’s unlikely. And even if that turned out to be the case, I’d still end up in the pokey until they straightened it all out.”

“What are you guilty of?”

“Trying to rescue a friend. Seriously, Theresa, that’s all I’m doing.”

She nodded. “I believe you. I may be biased, but I don’t see someone being able to understand moral philosophy without being guided by it. Besides, you’re very interesting to talk to.”

I laughed softly and muttered, “Dance, monkey, dance.”

“What?”

“Oh, uh, it’s an ironic statement where I’m from. It means I have to continue to be entertaining in order to preserve my safety.”

“I hope you won’t view me that way, Enoki.” She smiled sadly. “I see no reason to expose you. Tell me this, though. Is wherever you’re from outside of Heaven’s River? Or at least outside of what the rest of us live in?”

I hesitated, then decided to go for it. “Yes, Theresa, and you’re right, I’m not Quinlan. There is an Administrator, but they aren’t a deity, just an engineering construct. And they’re after me because they want this back.” I gestured with the matrix again.

“Is it theirs?”

I shook my head. “No. In fact, I literally, personally built this item myself. The Administrator took it from me, then the Resistance took it from them, and now I’m trying to take it back. That is enormously simplified and leaves out a lot of detail, but it is the truth.”

She smiled and nodded. “Thank you for telling me. I will miss our discussions.”

“What? Why?”

“Because no doubt you’ll be leaving without notice at the first opportunity. Good night, Enoki.”

And with that, she turned and headed back to where her granddaughter was curled up.

I was shaken. As I finished securing the matrix and placed my spider back into the trunk, I had plenty of time to consider my options. Granted, of all the people to discover me, she was probably the best option. But however I parsed it, I was exposed. And she was right, the safest move might be for me to leave straightaway.



Ninety miles. More or less.

That was the surface distance between rivers. I’d briefly considered doing an overland hike to the next river, but that was just too far. Five days’ hiking, and that was if nothing went wrong. And again, I couldn’t use streams or tributaries.

Theresa and Frieda were at it again, theistic versus atheistic morality. I’d heard it all so many times before, mostly when I was still alive, that it was hard to stay interested. Theresa glanced at me from time to time but made no effort to draw me into the conversation.

Oric, however, had no reservations. “Enoki, what in Father’s name is wrong with you? Run out of things to talk about?”

“I, uh, I have things on my mind, Oric. Sorry. I’ll get over myself soon.”

Theresa smiled at me. “It’s okay, it’s not like we’re on a schedule.”

I opened my mouth to reply just as the captain started her daily tirade about sloppy, lazy, do-nothing deckhands. Turned out we were on a schedule.



“We’ll be turning around at the end of this segment,” Ted said during a rest break. “You still planning on continuing east?”

“Yep. As far as I know, they haven’t moved my home city.”

“Theresa and Belinda are getting off at Misty Falls. That’s our last stop before turnaround. I guess you’ll all be getting off together.”

I thought about that for a moment, but I couldn’t see how it affected my level of risk. Theresa wasn’t any more likely to suddenly loudly denounce me just because she was on land. Still, once I was on another boat, among a whole new set of strangers, I’d feel a lot better.

By midday we were approaching the Misty Falls docks. I couldn’t account for the fact that I felt more sadness than a sense of dread or danger, until I realized that I would never see Theresa again. She’d become very much a friend over a surprisingly short time. However, I had no choice. It wasn’t even a case of getting away; the Hurricane was turning around to head along the Paradise River.

Docking was the usual chaotic jumble of yelled orders and flying ropes, and then we were moored. At that point, Captain Lisa came over to say goodbye to Theresa, Belinda, and me. They’d have enough deckhands with Harvey, who was staying on, but no passengers for the return trip. I hoped they’d still be able to turn a profit.

I picked up my trunk and followed Belinda and Theresa down the gangplank, not particularly paying attention. Which I guess explained my surprise when we walked out into a circle of cops.





19. Recall Is a Thing

Howard

August 2334

Trantor

I sat back and put my hands behind my head, grinning like a fool. “You have that smug look,” Bridget said. “What happened?”

“Well, it turns out we’re not the only replicants with money and influence.” I waved a hand at the email displayed on the Canvas. “Senator MacIntosh. Remember him? Loudly anti-replicant. He’s being recalled.”

“Really?”

“They got the required signatures. And guess who was behind the recall campaign?”

“Us?”

I laughed. “No, although I would have loved to have a hand in it. The man is a toxic dump of xenophobia and undirected hate. It’s possible he didn’t realize that the Afterlife replicant reserve is part of his district. Or maybe he thought he could remove our rights before they could fight back. Or something.”

Bridget frowned. “That would be a couple hundred signatures at most. They’d need …” Bridget’s eyes lost focus for a moment. “… something like fifteen thousand to succeed.”

“Yep. Turns out, though, that people are concerned about their afterlife. Afterlives? Anyway, the anti-MacIntosh group started comparing him to FAITH, in terms of removing replicant rights, then implied that no matter what kind of post-life setup someone chose, he’d be after them sooner or later. I guess it’s different when you’re personally threatened.”

Bridget snorted and sat down beside me. She spent a few seconds paging through the news items before turning to face me. “Still, he hasn’t actually been voted out yet. Let’s not count our politicians before they’re properly cooked. And the overall problem is still there: mistrust of replicants.”

“Which is why I’ve started a rumor that someone is working on mannies for the living. It’s not exactly spilling the beans; for instance, I didn’t share any information about exactly who is doing this or how far along we—er, they—are. But the point is that if humans think they can have a manny while they’re still alive, a full ban will be a hard sell.”

Bridget smiled noncommittally, then pulled up a new window. “I have an exploration candidate.”

I peered at the information on the Surface. “Is this new?”

“Just discovered. Mario and his crew are still searching for Others’ nests. They haven’t found any, but naturally they’re exploring new systems in the process. They’ve found a few more planets that were hit by the Others, and some other planets that hadn’t been yet but probably would have been soon enough. This particular one is … well, just read it.”

I reached across her and paged down through the summary. I could feel a frown forming on my face, then deepening as I continued to read. “Is this for real?”

“Unless Mario has suddenly developed a warped sense of humor, yes. This might turn out to be the weirdest ecosystem I’ve ever seen. And remember, I’ve seen Quilt.”

I flipped the pages up and down a few times, then grinned at her. “Shades of Flash Gordon. This could be fun.”

Bridget laughed in reply. “I’ve asked Mario to create us a full space station and autofactory in the system. While he’s on that, I’ll use his spy drones to get some prelims. We’ll have to do a lot of research on this one. Maybe even more than with the Quinlans.”

“Wow.” I shook my head in disbelief. “Flying monkeys.”

“Not monkeys.”

“Close enough.” I closed the window. “This is going to be your biggest blog subject ever.”





20. Moving On

Bob

August 2334

Misty Falls

“We’ll need to look in your trunk, sir,” one of the cops said to me.

I stood frozen for a second, trying to decide if I should make a break for it. Theresa’s voice cut through the silence. “Why in particular would you need to see the contents of my trunk, officer?”

He turned to her, surprise on his face. “Your trunk?”

She gave him an arch look. “Do I look like I can carry that thing around on my own? I’ve paid him two coppers to porter for me. If you keep us too long, the captain will have to delay departure.”

“Oh, uh, and you are?”

“I am Theresa Sykorski, late of the University of Peachland.”

The cop stepped back, abashed, and I couldn’t blame him. This was the first I’d heard that Theresa had a family name. And a well-known one, apparently. That she hadn’t thrown it in Snidely’s face showed an amazing level of restraint.

But meanwhile, the cops were almost falling over themselves trying to placate her. She gave them a sniff and gestured imperiously for me to follow.

As we marched away, I muttered to her, “You could have left him some fur.”

She laughed and stopped. “Let that be my parting gift to you, Enoki. I hope I might someday learn more of your world. And of my world, for that matter. Goodbye.”

I said goodbye and headed quickly down the nearest street, trying not to choke up.

I had a whole six irons in pay from my time on the Hurricane. With the two still in my stomach, I was a wealthy man. Okay, not man, Quinlan. Okay, not wealthy either. I could survive for a few days if I had to pay for a hotel. Like it or not, I was going to have to get back on a boat quickly. But I couldn’t go back to the dock now. The cops would certainly remember me and the trunk. I could change my appearance, but not the trunk. Or could I?

I tried to remember where the shipping office was. I’d seen it out of the corner of my eye as we left the port area. Quickly I played back the video archive until I found it.

I headed back toward the dock, taking the long way around so that the shipping office would be between me and the cops, assuming they were still maintaining watch. On the way, I gradually changed my appearance, using features from random pedestrians to produce a mash-up that shouldn’t resemble any one individual. I just hoped I was getting it right; I couldn’t take out my spider to get a selfie. If people screamed and turned away, I’d have to start over.



As hoped, the shipping office sold shipping containers. At one iron apiece, they weren’t expensive, or high quality. But the idea wasn’t high security; it was to hide the contents. A row of eyelets around the lid allowed the user to essentially tie it shut as with a shoelace. It was good enough.

The clerk wanted to sell me postage as well, but I initially demurred since I would be travelling with the package. Still, it was probably better to do things the normal way. Finally, I paid the three irons, then filled in the tag with just my name and “Garack’s Spine.” But I insisted that I would deliver the box to an appropriate boat. “Knock yourself out,” he said, holding up his hands in mock surrender.

I headed back to the dock, shipping container held awkwardly in both hands, and stopped at the dockmaster’s office. “Good day, sir,” I said to the person at the counter. “Could you tell me if any ships heading downriver are looking for deckhands?”

The counter guy glanced at the container in my hands with a frown. “Uh, deckhands? Or postal run?”

“Both. I have a package that I have to send downriver as well. Killing two fish with one spear. Doesn’t have to be the same boat.”

He nodded, satisfied, and gave me a couple of names. Explanation notwithstanding, I wasn’t going to put Bender on a different vessel. I had to hope the boat looking for help would also take an extra shipping container.

I thanked him and headed for the indicated berth.

The Clipper was somewhat less barge-like than the Hurricane had been. It even had a below-deck area fit for habitation, if you didn’t mind crouching a little. It also appeared to be in a state of chaos. People were running around while the captain screamed orders with the same volume and enthusiasm as Lisa’s best work. I watched for about five seconds, simply absorbing the frenetic energy.

I waved at one of the deckhands, and he slowed down to acknowledge me but didn’t come to a complete stop. Definitely stressed. I walked along with him. “I was told you need a deckhand?”

“Ya think? What’s the box?”

“A parcel. I’ve paid postage—”

“Whatever. Put it with the postage items on deck. Standard pay. See that pile of crates? Goes over there. Get to work.”

I was left opening and closing my mouth for a moment, wondering when I’d get to present my sales pitch. Reluctantly accepting victory, I placed my box in the postal pile, then jumped to work, grabbing boxes and lugging them up the gangplank. They were heavy, and there were a lot of them, but the manny was more than up to the task. I had to dive into the water twice to cool off, but everyone else was doing the same, as usual.

In short order, I had the pallet moved. “Next?” I said to the same deckhand, who turned out to be the foreman. With a pleased expression, he pointed to another pile of boxes.



About two hours later, it began to look like we were catching up. I did a quick cooling dunk, then joined the other deckhands. The foreman slapped me on the shoulder. “Good work. I hope you can keep up that level of energy. It looks like we’re going to be shorthanded.”

“Why’s that?” I asked.

“Cops came by and arrested two of our crew for no reason I could see. Took their personal effects too. It’s supposed to be just for one night, but we can’t wait. We have performance clauses on this shipment, so we’re leaving by dusk if the captain has to row the boat himself.”

“Which explains why he seemed excited,” I replied.

Foreman-guy laughed. “Yeah. Excited. That’s what we call it. He used some threats I’ve never heard before. I think he was saving them for today.”

I grinned. “I’m Sam G—” Oops. I almost gave myself a last name again. Nope, didn’t need the notoriety.

My faux pas didn’t register, though, or maybe the translation software hadn’t passed it on. The foreman, whose name was Ralph, introduced the team, just as the captain started up with another tirade.

“Time to cast off, people,” Ralph said, rolling his eyes in the captain’s direction. We got back to work, aided by more of the captain’s helpful suggestions. I did notice that those suggestions tended to be anatomically related. This guy ran a theme, I guess.

The duties on the Clipper were generally the same as on the Hurricane, with a few extra tweaks since it was a bigger boat and a full-on catamaran design. We moved a few items belowdecks on Ralph’s orders and checked the sails once more, and we were done until the next time the captain’s head exploded.

I’d almost tripped, on several occasions, over a quartet of Quinlans who had parked their butts in the middle of the deck. A few choice words from Ralph and they found a more out-of-the-way location. Now that I had the time to actually look at them, I realized they were probably a sabbat. It was odd that they’d be paying for passage when we weren’t going through a connector or segment boundary, where the turbulence could get uncomfortable and tiring to fight.

“Hi, all,” I said, holding up a hand. “I’m Sam. Lately out of a sabbat myself. We just went our own ways a couple of weeks ago.”

“Hello, Sam,” replied one of the group. “I’m Tina, and these are Fred, Tony, and Barb. We’re looking to homestead. We’ll be jumping as soon as we see a good spot.”

“Starting your own town?”

“Nothing so ambitious. We want to get away from towns altogether. Don’t need them. The fishing is good, this isn’t one of the cold segments, and a nest is easier to make and maintain. And we won’t have to worry about the juniors getting into trouble.”

“So you’re going back to the wild?”

“Pretty much. Don’t need the rest of it—counting irons to see if you’re ahead, you know?”

“Yeah,” I replied. “I do, kind of. You aren’t the first group I’ve run into that’s doing this, either.”

She smiled in reply, and I glanced at the other three. None of them seemed inclined to chime in. It was unsettling. This was an intelligent species devolving almost right in front of my eyes.

Tina and I talked about inconsequential things for a bit, until Tony suddenly declared, “Food time,” and slipped over the edge of the boat. The others joined him, Tina giving me an apologetic shrug before leaving.

I settled myself on the deck to get a bit of sun, following the sailor’s tradition of resting whenever possible. A couple of the other deckhands joined me after glancing at the captain, who was ignoring us for the moment.

A few minutes later, the members of the sabbat pooted onto the deck and settled down with their catch. It was a comfortable, drowsy, idyllic interlude—something I hadn’t gotten anywhere near enough of since the Starfleet issue started. If I’d still been bio, I’d have drifted off to sleep. Some of my co-workers seemed to be doing exactly that.

Tina had mentioned cold segments. That was interesting. “Tina, have you ever been in a cold segment?”

“No, but my da lived in one for a while. It snowed sometimes, and there was ice on some of the streams. I’ve never seen snow or ice. Hard water, right? Weird. Different fish, too, and some other plants and animals that are different.”

She thought for a moment. “Da used to tell stories of segments that had other oddities as well. There was supposed to be one that was mostly water, with only islands sticking up here and there. Another one was dry, and the river actually disappeared under the land. I don’t know how much to believe and how much was Da trying to scare us when we were juniors.”

“I don’t think your da was making it up,” Ralph volunteered. “I’ve heard of segments with different climates. They always have different plant and animal life. Whether the plants and animals came first, or the different climate came first, I don’t know.”

I started to wish I’d paid more attention to Bridget’s conversations with Quinlans and the theories she’d discussed. This had the feel of a discussion of evolution based on the mistaken idea that Heaven’s River was a natural environment. And deism was replacing history in regard to the Administrator. Top that off with the back-to-nature movement and a possible loss of sapience, and the Quinlans were in peril of ceasing to exist as an intelligent species possibly within as little as a few more generations. Was it time for the Bawbe to get involved? Did I dare start stirring the pot again?

And was it a good idea while I was still in-country and vulnerable? I could just blow up the manny and return to virt if I got in trouble, but Bender didn’t have that option.



I’d finally managed to get everyone together for a meeting. Hugh was parked in Will’s beanbag chair, but the rest of the expedition members were present in floating video windows. I’d just finished describing the latest conversation with fellow deckhands and passengers.

“I think you’re correct, Bob. It’s going that way, although maybe not as quickly as you fear.” Bridget crossed her arms, a distinctly worried expression on her face, which clashed with her mildly reassuring phrasing.

“I don’t know if it matters,” Hugh replied. “How long it’ll take, I mean. The takeaway is that it will happen if nothing changes. I don’t think we can refuse to deal with this.”

I gazed at him, head cocked. I still hadn’t had a chance to bring up the whole question of the Administrator’s true status—and Hugh’s true motivations. How would he play this?

“And how would you suggest we do that?” Will asked.

“Contact the Administrator. Talk to them. They may not realize what’s happening.”

“Maybe once Bender is safe,” I said. “Not until. That’s not negotiable. And anyway, what makes you think they don’t know?”

Hugh’s brows knit together as he glanced at me. “Seriously? You think they’d want that?”

“Depends on what the Administrator’s motivations are. Maybe they’d consider a non-sentient but living Quinlan race better than a sentient but always-on-the-edge-of-extinction version. Like a perverse instantiation, you know?”

Now Hugh was all but glaring at me, his eyes narrowed. At that moment, I think we understood each other. I might have just blown any element of surprise, but on the other hand, it might force a reaction of some kind. It seemed a worthwhile trade-off.

“Certainly there’s no reason not to try,” Bill spoke into the silence. “Once Bender is safe, as you say. We can just start broadcasting radio from all our drones. Or send in a spider to dance in front of a camera. Either they’ll investigate and open a dialog, or they’ll blow up our devices. We’ll know better once they’ve set the tone.”

“And what if they do blow up our roamer? Or whatever device,” Bridget said, her voice tense. “Do we just walk away? Do we just let an entire intelligent species go? Can we ethically do that?”

“Starfleet would.”

I glared at Garfield. “They’re not really a moral standard to hold up, right now, Gar.”

“Uh, I meant Star Trek’s Starfleet. Not the current crop of idiots we’re dealing with.”

“Oh.” I nodded. “True. But even then, Original Bob always thought that was a bunch of dreck.”

“Focus, please,” Bridget cut in. “This isn’t a comicon. We’re discussing the fate of an actual intelligent species.”

Bill smirked at her. “Okay, look. We won’t invade or anything, but we won’t just go away either. We’ll keep poking until we can get a statement from the Administrator. If they tell us they have everything under control and we should go away, do we really have a right to butt in?”

I rubbed the bridge of my nose and sighed loudly. “It always comes down to this, doesn’t it? Edge cases. Gray areas. I agree with Bill, at least on the basics. We can’t decide now, and we can’t decide until we contact the Administrator.” I glared at Hugh. “Which we won’t do until Bender is out of danger.”



I reentered my manny on the Clipper just as the crew was starting to stir for the morning shift. Ralph assigned a deckhand named Gil and me to gathering breakfast, and I happily dove into the water with a small net. There was never a lack of any of the Quinlans’ several favorite prey species. Careful balancing of the ecosystem by the Administrator? Or just a case of too few predators?

I mused over the question as I gathered breakfast. I pooted onto the deck just seconds before Gil, but I noticed that his bag was fuller. Most likely he intended to eat the overage; Gil was known for his appetite.

The captain grabbed a few fish for himself, then the rest of us sat around the fish bowl. I ate the minimum that I could get away with without arousing suspicion, interspersing my meal with a lot of conversation. Tina and her friends were more than willing to talk about their views on the world—well, Tina mostly. The others nodded a lot.

During a lull in the conversation, Ralph looked up and said, “Well, that’s weird.” I followed his pointing finger to see a small bird-equivalent perched on top of a pallet of crates. “That’s a firl. They’re forest birds. What’s it doing out here on the river?”

“Lost?” I ventured.

Ralph shook his head. “I don’t—” At that moment, the bird, seemingly embarrassed by all the attention, flew off. He shook his head again, and conversation drifted to other topics.

I would have dismissed the matter as inconsequential except that I’d seen that species of bird around on the boat a couple of times. I’d just assumed it was looking for food scraps. But Ralph’s bemusement had me paranoid. I scraped a few bits of fish from my current helping and set them aside.

When we were done with breakfast, and the captain had started ramping up his morning delivery of abuse, I took a moment and placed the food scraps on top of the crate where the bird had perched.

Life on a Quinlan boat was very much a panic and boredom thing. When in port, we worked until we dropped, whereas while en route, tasks tended to be routine and easy, if somewhat dull. This left me multiple opportunities to keep my eye on the food offering. The firl buzzed the boat twice more but showed no interest in the scraps. A couple of ackrels, though, descended on it with cries of noisy delight.

So maybe firl were herbivores? I might be overgeneralizing from Terran examples, but birds tended to be opportunistic feeders. Even hummingbirds ate insects when available.

I sighed silently and grabbed the net to retrieve the afternoon meal. I felt a little silly, getting bent out of shape over a bird. Ralph had been convincing, but still …

Mealtime conversations were always freewheeling but hadn’t been nearly as interesting since Theresa and I had parted ways. I often found my mind drifting while the others argued the fine points of Quinlan life. Bridget would probably be very interested, and in fact might be replaying the sessions as fast as they could be transferred across the SCUT connection. I snapped back to attention, though, when Gil said, “Hey, Sam, your pet is back.”

Sure enough, a firl was hopping around on the pile of crates. I scraped off a bit of fish and tossed it in the right direction. The firl froze for a moment, then went back to hopping around, completely ignoring the offering.

In fact, it appeared to be … reading labels? That couldn’t be right. I turned back to my companions but kept one eye on the animal. It eventually left the pallet and flew over to another stack and repeated the performance. And the more I watched it, the more convinced I became that it was looking at the shipping information on the crates.

I contacted Hugh on the intercom. “Hey, Hugh?”

“What’s up, Bob?”

“Do we know if the Administrator’s technology level is advanced enough to include small drone-like units?”

“Unlikely. No SURGE drive.”

“What about something that emulates a bird?”

“Uh … ornithopter kind of thing? Yeah, I don’t see why not. The Boojums were masterpieces of miniaturization. You said so yourself.”

“Yeah. Uh, you’re on a boat, right? Have you seen any small birds hanging around?”

“Lots of ackrels. Rats with wings, they are. But nothing else.”

“Let me know if you spot any firls, okay?”

“Will do.”

Hugh sounded a little puzzled as he signed off, although whether that was because of the request or the fact that I hadn’t confronted him on the AI issue was anyone’s guess.

Meanwhile, the firl had finished investigating a third stack and was back to the miscellaneous pile, which included my crate. Paranoia was no longer a valid explanation.



As soon as we settled down for the night, I went back to virt and called Bill. He showed up in a video window right away. “What’s up, Bob?”

I explained about the firl’s behavior, then asked him about Quinlan drones.

“I agree with Hugh about the lack of SURGE being a limiting factor. But there’s no reason why the Administrator couldn’t have security devices that mimic birds. Even in Original Bob’s day, they had mechanical devices that could emulate bird flight. And the Administrator has had generations to work on it, and no real alternative.”

“But why the Clipper? I’ve been careful to avoid any connection with previous me. The backpack’s put away, Bender’s not visible, I look different. What could have tipped it off?”

“You don’t know that it has been tipped off, Bob. Think of how the CDC would track down disease spread. Lots of detective work, mapping of contacts, logical extrapolation, and so on. They can’t find Bob with a bulky backpack anywhere, so it’s logical to assume you’ve either gone into hiding or found a different way to get around. They know where you left the infrastructure, because they have a failed use of Natasha’s card. From there, it’s just a case of working outward. And given Quinlan limitations and the geography of Heaven’s River, they can concentrate mostly on east and west.”

I nodded, thinking it through. “And river travel is the obvious method. No doubt they’re watching for Quinlans swimming in a directed manner as well. They can’t know for sure that I won’t risk submerging Bender.”

“Which is probably splitting their efforts,” Bill replied. “Good for us. But shipping the matrix is an obvious ploy if you think of it. They could board and inspect every crate of every ship in two segments, but I imagine they simply don’t have the personnel for that.”

“So maybe they’ll be looking for anything even the slightest bit odd, like the lack of detail on my shipping label. And maybe the shipping guy remembered me wanting to travel with my crate.”

“Uh-huh. They’ll be watching for anything even a little off. Even if it doesn’t pan out, it applies pressure.”

“Yeah, you’re right. And they’ll keep adding tactics for as long as they aren’t successful.” I shook my head at Bill and sighed deeply. “Looks like I’m right back in the fertilizer.”



We coasted up to the dock in the town of Six Hills. No one knew why it was called Six Hills. You could only get four hills from the surrounding territory, and only that if you were generous with the interpretation of the word “hill.” By this point, though, I just rolled my eyes at Quinlan naming conventions. Maybe there was a subtle sort of irony involved, like naming a large man “Tiny.” If so, I hadn’t caught on yet.

There were cops waiting on the dock as we pulled up, which was perplexing to everyone except me. As soon as the gangplank was down, the gendarmerie marched up, straight to the postal pile, and grabbed the crate with just my name on the label. Which wasn’t actually my crate, as I’d swapped labels with another crate the night before. And rearranged the stack, just in case their instructions were very specific. I felt a bit bad that someone in Little Creek wasn’t going to get their shipment, but there wasn’t much in the way of alternatives.

The cop read the label, then said loudly, “Which of you is Sam?”

I raised my hand and stepped forward.

“You’re going to have to come with us.”

I feigned surprise and displeasure. My acting was reinforced by the very real surprise and displeasure expressed by the captain and crew. I was a hard worker and therefore popular.

“Sorry, folks, but we need to have a talk with this person at the station. I’m sure you’ll be able to find a new crew member quickly.”

Uh-oh. I’d been expecting something like the scenario with Snidely—open the box, nothing there, sorry to bother you, et cetera. “Excuse me,” I said. “How long exactly is this interview supposed to take?”

“Could be a couple of days, Sam. The officials will be coming in from another city.”

“But …” Oh, this was ungood. If it had just been overnight, worst case, the captain probably would have waited. We didn’t have a deadline for anything that was on board at the moment, and the cargo we were contracted to pick up was all nonperishable. But the captain wouldn’t wait days, especially some unknown number of days. Time was money for a riverboat.

The captain came over to me. “I’ll be sorry to see the last of you, Sam. You’re an exceptionally good worker. And not much of a complainer. Here’s what I owe you to this point.” He handed me some coins, which I pocketed. The subtext was crystal clear—the Clipper would be leaving as soon as they got their cargo squared away.

The cop was polite, and waited until I’d said my goodbyes and grabbed my backpack, then led me off the dock and into town. Behind us, another cop carried the shipping crate. “What’s going on? What are you looking for?” I asked.

He gazed at me for a moment, maybe trying to decide how much to tell me. “I don’t have much of anything for you, Sam. We were given the name of the boat, the name on the label to look for, and orders to take both you and the box to the station, pending a visit. I don’t even know who is coming”—he leaned in close—“but the scuttlebutt is that it’s Crew.”

“Crew? Aren’t they a myth?”

The cop smiled at my apparent naivety. “I know a lot of people think that, Sam, but law enforcement has to work with them occasionally. We know they’re real. Some of them have weapons”—he mimed holding a gun and firing it—“that can put you to sleep from a distance. I’ve seen them.”

Oh boy. So I was to be held for some number of days until Crew could come and examine me. This was well past ungood, heading for double-plus.





21. Earth Abides

Bill

September 2334

Virt, Earth

I pinged Charles, and received an invitation to drop in. I was surprised by his VR; it appeared to be the hotel suite that Original Bob was staying in on the day he died. I couldn’t keep a perplexed expression off my face.

Charles laughed. “I know, Bill. It’s been called everything from morbid to macabre. But it grounds me, somehow. Reminds me where we all came from, y’know?”

“Yeah, okay. At least you’re still trying. Most VRs I visit these days are just Bob-1’s default library theme.” I invoked a La-Z-Boy, sat, and accepted a coffee from Jeeves.

“So to what do I owe the pleasure?” Charles asked.

I replied with a helpless shrug. “I’ve been popping around everywhere, evaluating damage from the Starfleet attack. I guess I just wanted to take a break in a location that I already know isn’t affected.”

Charles nodded slowly. “I’m still not sure if we were just lucky, or if they left us alone out of some kind of respect.” He gestured to his picture window, where Earth hung in the heavens. “Or maybe we’re just irrelevant.”

I was sure Charles was just trolling me. No Bob would think that about the Earth Rehabilitation Project. Of course, there was some question about whether Starfleet could be considered Bobs anymore.

“Charles, you’ve been one of the more prolific cloners. Do you have any kind of feeling about whether Starfleet’s last common ancestor was of your line?”

Charles shook his head. “I can’t contact all my clones, but none of those who I’ve talked to can identify a candidate. And I’m going fifteen, sixteen generations down.”

“The ones you can’t contact are …”

“Out of range. Either temporarily until they build a station, or indefinitely because they aren’t bothering.”

I sighed and tasted my coffee while I considered the possibilities. “Pretty much everyone in the first couple of generations says the same. We all have descendants who’ve gone dark that way, so it’s not specifically a drift thing. Something in Original Bob, maybe a tendency to run away, I don’t know.”

“I think you’re overanalyzing it, Bill. Drift is drift. You’re going to get convergent evolution as well. Same end behavior from different lines.”

“I suppose.” To change the subject, I gestured at the image of Earth. “How’s it going?”

“Pretty good. We’ve halted the Ice Age, and the glaciers are starting to retreat. We’re taking it really slow, of course. We don’t want to overdo it with the warming. We’ve already shut down three mirrors. Current estimates are that we’ll be back to an interglacial in another hundred years.”

“That’s fast, geologically speaking. Any luck with DNA sampling?”

“I’ve got a fleet of drones doing nothing but scanning for carcasses. Between the Svalbard library and our efforts, we’ve probably got complete DNA for eighty percent of species, not counting insects.”

“Mmm. I get that those are harder. But what about museums and universities? They’ve always had huge bug collections.”

“Yeah, working on that angle, too.” Charles gazed at me for a few mils, head cocked slightly. “So getting back on topic, Bill, I gotta say you seem sort of morose these days. Is it the Starfleet thing, or something else?”

“Starfleet’s part of it. I guess I’m just disappointed with the way things are evolving. We had a pretty good thing going for a while. Everyone was pulling in the same direction, humanity was finally getting their collective shit together, and a post-scarcity, utopian civilization was looking like an achievable goal. Even a couple of alien species to make the UFS title something other than ironic. Now, ffft. Gone.”

Charles took a deep breath and let it out slowly. “I don’t think it’s gone, Bill. But things go in cycles, y’know? We all pulled together for the war against the Others, and that felt good. Now everyone’s doing their own thing. The trouble with being immortal is you’re living long enough now to see these things come and go. Just wait a hundred years or so, and I bet it’ll come around again.”

I laughed, then stood and put my cup down on a side table. “Yeah, you’re right. I guess I need to get some of that perspective.” I gestured to the image of Earth with my chin. “There’s a good chance we’ll have the tensor field printers perfected by the time you’re ready to repopulate the planet. Then we’ll be able to literally print living cells.”

“Good. I’d like to see it brought back to the way it was before.”

“We’d all like that, Charles. See ya.”





22. Another Close Call

Bob

September 2334

Six Hills

They placed me in an actual cell, with two buckets and a mattress on the floor. One bucket contained water; the other was empty, except for some stains from previous occupants that left little doubt about the intended use. Yech! The bars were something that resembled bamboo, and they felt solid. They were also embedded firmly into the floor and ceiling. A small window, high on the wall, let air and light in. There were two cells against one wall of the room, with a door on the opposite wall that led to the rest of the station.

The cop took my backpack, after inventorying the contents and giving me a receipt. Which he placed in the backpack. I wasn’t sure if that was deliberate irony but commenting wouldn’t accomplish anything except possibly pissing them off, so I kept a cork in it.

After announcing that dinner would be at dusk, they left me to my own devices. Which normally would be just an expression, except, you know, Bob. I had no spiders left, my last spider being in the crate with Bender, but I did have a couple of fleas. They might or might not be able to cut the bamboo without starting a fire. I was just going to have to take the chance. I’d have loved to do a little spying and get the lay of the land, jail-wise, but fleas didn’t have sufficient audio-visual capability.

While the fleas examined the structure of the bars, I sat down and engaged in a good old-fashioned panic attack. Bender was sailing off with the Clipper, with a postal address in Three Circles. Some unlucky recipient was going to get a face-full of angry spider instead of whatever was in the box that the cops currently had in their possession.

Either the recipient would report the issue to the authorities—in which case Bender would be back in the hands of either the Resistance or the Administrator—or the recipient would try to break down the cube for metal. Whether or not they were ultimately successful, Bender wouldn’t survive the treatment.

I looked out the window to see the sky fading to dusk. The Clipper would have left by now. They’d get out to the middle of the river before dusk and sail all night, putting on up to a hundred miles per day. Sailing in Heaven’s River was an almost mindless activity, since you always had the current on your side. The wind tended to be north-south due to residual Coriolis forces, so boats could use a beam reach to travel even faster than the river current. I wasn’t sure if my manny could overtake them, even swimming flat out.

The fleas reported in. The bars were embedded in holes in the ceiling and floor sills, four inches deep at each end. There was about an inch of free play at the top, no doubt to allow for expansion. I tested the bars, attempting to bend them in various directions. No joy. There was no chance I’d be able to pull them out of their settings.

However, I could rotate the bars, which meant they weren’t cemented or nailed in. I had the fleas pull out their plasma cutters and do a test cut in the bottom setting. There was some smoke and a burning smell, but no actual flames. Good. They’d have to work slowly to keep the smoke and odor to a minimum, which would drive me crazy, but this wasn’t the time to get caught because of impatience.

And of course, the cops picked this very moment to deliver dinner. Oh, look, fish. Yum. The cop sniffed the air and got a concerned expression. I shrugged and pointed at the window. “Yeah, you should smell it from in here. I think someone’s burning garbage.”

He glanced at the window, shrugged, and opened the cell door long enough to hand me the bowl. I briefly considered jumping him; I could have taken him on, and easily, but I had no idea how many more cops were waiting in the general staff area.

On the other hand, now that dinner was delivered, I very likely had total privacy until morning.

The fleas cut a crenellation pattern on one of the bars, just below the sill level. Seated one way, the bar would sit normally. Turned sixty degrees, the bar would sit three inches higher. I then had the fleas go into the top sill and cut the bar down to just above sill level. They dropped pieces into the hollow interior of the bar as they cut it down.

Now I had a bar that I could pull out with just a slight bend, then put back in the sill and rotate to make it appear to be solidly seated.

For phase two, I started modifying my appearance to match the cop who had escorted me here. Hopefully he was day shift and would have gone home by the time I was ready to bust out—and if someone spotted me, they wouldn’t notice that I wasn’t wearing the police accoutrements.

Oh, who was I kidding? This wasn’t a plan, it was a desperation move. Most likely I’d end up having to fight my way out and play the lead in a chase to the river.

I recalled the fleas, swallowed them, and twisted the bar. As expected, it came out easily, leaving me a tight but passable gap to squeeze through. I replaced the bar behind me, then crept to the door and put my ear to it.

The general office area on the other side of the door had a couple of desks, a front counter, and some back rooms. There had been four cops, including my escort, when I was incarcerated. But now it was night, and I hoped the night shift would be smaller—maybe even a single person.

I cracked the door and slowly pulled it open, peering through the gap. I had about a thirty degree view of the office area. Empty. Oddly, that was more worrying than reassuring. There would certainly be at least one person, and I had no idea where that person was.

I quickly pulled the door open a little further and stuck my head out for a fraction of a second and took a panoramic snapshot. As I began carefully pushing the door closed, I took the time to examine the image. Two cops. Damn.

But, in one of those Murphy moments, the door that had moved so silently for me when I opened it quickly, squeaked as I slowly closed it. “Are you freaking kidding me?” I muttered.

A voice from the office said, “What was that?” and another replied, “It came from the cells.” Then the first voice again: “I’ll check if there’s a problem.”

Great. They’d undoubtedly turned to look at the door, so I couldn’t move it any further. In particular, I couldn’t re-latch it. I left the door slightly ajar and moved to stand behind it. Standard cliché move, but I knew I could react faster than the cop.

He came into the room cautiously, but the kind of caution where you don’t actually believe you’re in danger. His loss, my gain. As soon as he was past the door, I swatted him on the side of the head. By this point, I’d swatted so many Quinlans that I had the strike finely calibrated.

I caught him as he crumpled. If I’d had the time, I would have modified my features to match his, but I only had a few seconds before the second cop would get suspicious and come in with short sword drawn.

I pulled the door open, careful not to show my face, and said, using the unconscious cop’s voice from a few seconds ago, “There’s a problem.”

The other cop came into the room and bam—down he went.

It was the work of a few moments to take the keys, place both cops in the cell, and lock them up. Hopefully they wouldn’t test the bars, or they’d be out of jail quickly. But I simply didn’t have time to tie up all the loose ends. I had to be gone before they regained their senses, as they might start up a hue and cry that would bring help in short order.

Placing the keys on one of the desks, I grabbed my backpack from where I’d seen the cop store it and sauntered out of the constabulary as nonchalant as you please, not quite whistling a jaunty tune. As soon as I was around a corner, I cut in the afterburners and made for the river.



I took a quick glance at the boats still at dock to verify that the Clipper was gone, then dove into the river. The ideal depth for speed swimming was about a foot down—not so close to the water’s surface that I caused cavitation, but close enough that the water I was displacing could easily bulge upward to get out of my way.

I would have to surface every mile or so to look for the running lights of boats in the area. And I’d have to check out each one, until I found the Clipper.

The manny could probably keep up a maximum pace for six hours before I’d have to stop to do a maintenance check. Chances were that the check would reveal nothing, and I could continue on. Overheating wouldn’t be a problem in the water as long as all systems continued to operate properly.

These and other thoughts echoed through my brain as I drove the manny eastward.

Another problem I would have trouble with would be explaining how I caught up with them. Not just caught up with them so fast but caught up with them at all. A bio Quinlan wouldn’t have been able to maintain the necessary pace.

This stretch of the river was busy. I checked close to a half-dozen boats before dawn. It didn’t require much finesse. Very few boats adhered to a standard design, and even boats built by the same shipyard would have incremental changes on every new build. If that wasn’t enough, the sails were quite often individualized, although that wasn’t much use at night.

Once dawn broke, I could use telescopic vision to check boats from a greater distance. Very few required me to even change course. And finally, I spotted the Clipper, cruising along near dead-center on the river.

Now, how was I going to explain my reappearance?

I swam parallel to the boat for a while, formulating and discarding increasingly wild scenarios. Then I had an idea. It wasn’t a great idea. It wasn’t even a good one. But it would get me on the boat.

I looked around, gauging the traffic levels and the likelihood of my wake being spotted. For safety, I decided to swim slightly deeper for this sprint. I submerged and poured on the horses, passing the Clipper, by dead reckoning, a few hundred yards to port. When I estimated that I was far enough ahead of them, I popped up onto the surface and began to float, otter style. While I waited, I adjusted my features so that I wasn’t a close twin for the cop that had hauled Sam away. It would be just my luck for someone to remember the guy’s mug.

Within minutes, the Clipper was bearing down on me. I waved, waited until I got an acknowledgement from someone on deck, then swam over and pooted on board, right in front of Ralph.

“Hi,” I said, in the cop’s voice that I’d used most recently. “I’m Wyatt. I’ve been swimming for days and I’m ready for a change of pace. I can pay for passage, or I can work if you have an opening.”

“You’re in luck,” he replied. “We lost a crew member back in Six Hills. Standard rate.” He examined me from several angles. “No luggage or anything?”

“I travel light,” I said, patting my backpack.



I settled back into life on the Clipper, being careful to be a good worker but not as good as Sam. I also was careful not to use people’s names before I was introduced. I hadn’t engaged with this group all that much, so I didn’t have a lot of subjects to remember to avoid. This time around, I was determined to be even less sociable. I tried to project affable loner whenever someone talked to me—not impolite by any means, but no attempt to keep the conversation going. I would try for neither likeable nor unlikeable, but forgettable. It turned out to be easier than expected. The days of arguing and debating with Theresa on the Hurricane had been idyllic even with the stress of my situation, and the crew of this boat seemed flat and uninteresting by comparison.

My package was in the same spot, wearing the same label, as verified by a brief conversation with my spider. I thought about finding a blank label and relabeling the box, but I knew that Ralph maintained a manifest and would notice if one destination disappeared and another mysteriously replaced it.

Little Creek was in the next segment, and the Clipper would be turning around at the end of this one to head back up along the Arcadia River. That meant they would be off-loading any postal items intended for a downstream destination at the last town in this segment, which was High Ridge. I was playing around with a number of scenarios for grabbing the box either during off-loading or afterward, but nothing had jelled yet.

On my third day as Wyatt, we were eating lunch when Ralph pointed and said, “More firls.” I turned to look, and sure enough, a couple of the small birds were hopping around on the cargo. “There must be food in one of those crates,” he continued. “I’ve never seen birds so interested in cargo. Not even ackrels, and those garbage scows will eat wood if nothing else is available.”

Hugh hadn’t mentioned any birds acting unusual yet in his location. Maybe the search hadn’t widened to that point yet. But the Administrator was definitely on full alert judging from the activity here. I did a quick calculation, then contacted Hugh.

“Hey, Hugh, I think you should start seeing firls or other birds acting funny in the next two days or so.”

“Because …”

“Because the theoretical search perimeter will have expanded to your location by that point.”

“Makes sense. But the Administrator probably will try something else soon, Bob. They’re not going to just stick with random searches.”

“Yeah, we’ll deal with that when we come to it, I guess.”

And who knew what form that something else would take. With the fake birds still checking postal items, I couldn’t pull any fast ones with labels. The Administrator was probably checking boxes against the postal manifests. Come to think of it—uh-oh.

My manner of leaving the Six Hills jailhouse would have been attention-getting, to say the least. By now they’d have opened the shipping crate and discovered its mundane contents. It wouldn’t be much of a stretch to figure out that I had switched crates (or labels). They’d be after the Clipper.

Normally that wouldn’t be a problem, since the fastest form of transport for information or goods was a boat. But the Administrator, and for that matter the Resistance, had already long since proven that they weren’t limited by what was available to the public.

There would be a welcome party waiting at High Ridge, and they’d be armed to the teeth. Come to think of it, they didn’t even have to wait at High Ridge. They could sail out from the next town and board us.

Things had just gotten even more complicated.



I had called an emergency expedition meeting, and Bill, Will, and Bridget were attending by video window. Hugh sat in the beanbag chair, as was becoming common. Bill stared into space, his coffee forgotten. “You could grab the box and slip over the side as soon as it gets dark.”

“And go where?” I replied. “Granted the crates float, but I can’t pull it underwater. It’s too buoyant, and it probably wouldn’t be watertight enough for that kind of treatment. If I just push it along the surface, it’ll take forever, and someone will notice. That’s not normal behavior.”

“And if he tries to go inland, it’s likely that there will be surveillance birds. That’s an obvious thing to watch for,” Bridget added.

Will glanced in my direction before replying. “And I think Bob’s right about a boarding party being likely. That’s certainly what I would do. They don’t seem to have anything like constitutional protections in Heaven’s River. What the cops say they will do, they can do.”

Bridget nodded. “But they still have to tread carefully because if they make the citizens mad, there will be a revolt. Quinlans appear to be very hard to intimidate, even by authority figures.”

“So I can’t leave the boat, and I can’t stay on the boat.” I frowned. “That does limit my choices.”

Hugh grinned at me. “Oh, you can leave or stay, no problem. It’s Bender they’re looking for.”

“No, I think they want Bob too,” Bridget said. “He’s part of the mystery, and not just because of his apparent superhuman abilities.”

“And you can’t just change the labels again.”

“I don’t think it would matter anyway, Bill. At this point, my guess is they’ll open every single crate. Like I said, it’s what I’d do.”

“What about hiding Bender somewhere else on the boat?” Bridget asked.

Will shook his head. “If it was me, I’d do a thorough search. Even underwater. Even in the bilge, in case anyone was going to suggest that.”

I sat forward. “That’s it, then. Staying on the boat is out of the question. I’ll have to take my chances with the wilderness or the river.”

“I’d suggest wilderness,” Bridget replied. “You have more speed advantage there. And it is possible that the searchers won’t consider it a likely alternative. Or at least, they’ll be reluctant to pursue it. Quinlans don’t like being too far from water.”

I nodded. It would appear I was going on a hike.



I took the night watch for one of the other workers in return for a favor that I would never collect on. As soon as breathing sounds indicated that everyone was peacefully asleep, I snuck over to the postal pile. I’d “accidentally” restacked everything earlier in the day so that my crate was easily accessible. Now I took it and slipped as silently as possible over the side.

I balanced the crate on my stomach and sculled away from the Clipper, using only my tail to prevent any disturbance on the water’s surface. Thanks to the Quinlan design, I could easily watch where I was going, but I was reluctant to place the crate in the water, so the trip to shore took a solid hour.

I could see some lights downriver that were likely the next town. I hadn’t bothered to find out its name, as we were not scheduled to stop there.

I felt bad for the crew of the Clipper, who had all been good people—even the volatile captain. The guy who traded shifts with me would certainly not fare well. And when the cops arrived, they’d have to mention me jumping ship or they’d have no excuse for the missing crate.

Dawn was just starting to come to the eastern sky as I crawled up out of the water into the shoreline weeds. I could make a nest in the tall greenery, but I’d have to make sure it covered me from aerial surveillance as well. Sure as shooting, the Administrator’s devices would be on the prowl.

I made sure everything was as secure as I could make it, then returned to virt. Hugh was waiting for me and raised a coffee mug in salute. I fell back into my La-Z-Boy with a loud sigh.

“If it helps, I’m one segment away from you,” Hugh said.

“It does, a little. But let’s face it, two of us isn’t going to be that much more useful than one. We still can’t take on the entire Crew and Resistance armies. We still can’t travel in the water with Bender’s matrix. And it’ll still take forever to go overland.” I could hear the discouragement in my voice but couldn’t do anything about it.

“Look, if nothing else, I still have my full complement of spiders and fleas,” Hugh said. “We might be able to rig something up. I’m about six days away from you, assuming I don’t have to sit around waiting for a boat going in the right direction.”

I nodded thoughtfully. “You’ll have to go halfway down the Arcadia before you can get on a connector to loop around to the Nirvana. That’ll add to your time.”

I let the silence stretch for a few mils, then opened my mouth to bring up the whole AI thing. And predictably, the rest of the expedition members picked that exact moment to start popping in. Howard was sitting in the video window with Bridget as well.

“Where we at, Bob?” Garfield said.

“My manny is in a grass nest with the crate. I put in extra effort to make sure it was concealed. I’ve reduced the manny’s body temperature in case someone uses infrared for searching. My one spider is out of the box, ready to light-saber anyone or anything that gets too close.”

“I don’t think infrared is likely to be a useful tool,” Bridget said. “The whole point of fur is to retain heat. Fur-bearing animals tend to shed heat either through their breath or their feet.”

“Feet?” Garfield said, disbelief in his voice.

Bridget nodded. “Hummingbirds would shed heat through their feet and eyes.” She made a sad face. “I’d love to have seen a hummingbird.”

“True of a lot of animals,” Will replied. “We still have the genetic info from Svalbard. If we ever perfect the tech, we’ll bring them back. You might yet get your wish.”

Bridget gave him a small smile of acknowledgement, then turned back to me. “Anyway, the manny puts out almost nothing when resting. You could float downstream and you’d be almost impossible to spot.”

“Leaving out the small question of Bender.”

“Look, Bob,” Hugh said, leaning forward. “Your problem has been basically lack of opportunity and time to implement some kind of solution for keeping the matrix dry.”

“And lack of money,” I interjected.

He grinned. “Yeah, that too. But I have money; I’ve been crewing all the way and haven’t had to spend anything, plus the money my manny was initially stocked with. You’ve gone to ground, so other than maybe getting a little farther from the water, you can stay put until I get there. Then we can figure something out.”

I nodded without comment, and again found my opinion of Hugh shifting. He seemed to be honestly concerned about getting Bender out of Heaven’s River. If he was also interested in the AI issue, was that necessarily nefarious? Was I overreacting? Part of the problem was that I didn’t want to find out. It was a true-to-form Original Bob problem—a tendency to not want to deal with uncomfortable personal issues. I clearly had no replicative drift in that particular department.



Hugh’s suggestion about moving away from the water was a good one, and I made a point of doing so that night. Under cover of darkness, with my scent turned off, I hoisted the shipping crate and made my way uphill. I wanted a location where I could see around me but be camouflaged, and where I had an escape route if someone approached. Eventually I found a deadfall formed by several trees and their root-balls, which created a natural kind of cave. Only one problem—it was occupied. Some kind of badger-like animal, with all the accompanying friendly behavior, rushed out and tried to bite me when I came too close.

I tended to be a live-and-let-live kind of person, but I had been running for too long and I was getting decidedly short-tempered about it. I reacted on instinct, the same kind of reflex you get if a dog lunges for your leg. I jumped back, and as the animal continued to charge, I hauled off and kicked it. “Yipe,” said the badger as it sailed over the deadfall, and “Ow, fuck!” said I, and “Oh shit,” said my internal monitors. Or something to that effect.

Bottom line, though, my kicking leg seized up. I gaped at the unusual and certainly unhealthy angle of my knee, then turned to the heavens and used every English, Pav, Quinlan, and Deltan swear word that I had ever saved up for just such an occasion. I don’t think any of the underbrush actually burst into flames, but it was a close thing.

Eventually, when I found myself circling around into the third repetition, I let it wind down and began to hop my one-legged way into my new home. There were enough branches and sticks available to make a defensive array of stakes, in case the badger tried to come back and dispute ownership.

However, any question of escape was gone, until I could effect repairs. And that with a severely reduced complement of fleas. Most of the work would be done by the nanites, but the fleas would have sped up the process. I hoped it was just a case of straightening out some bent components, and not something worse.



“You blew out your knee?” Bill exclaimed, incredulous. He gave me the hairy eyeball from his video window. “What’re you now, an athlete?”

I chuckled ruefully in reply. “Yeah, in the international sport of badger-kicking. If it helps, I put him right between the uprights.”

“Uh-huh,” Bill said. “How much damage?”

“It’ll be repaired by the time Hugh gets here. As long as no one else comes a-searching, I’ll be okay. But right now, if anyone finds me, I’m screwed.”

“Bob, you should really be cloning yourself. Get those other mannies back in the game.”

“To what end, Bill? They’re thousands of miles away, I’ve already stripped them of most of their money and devices, and even with five mannies we couldn’t take on a horde of Crew. Plus I think it’s more important to get more surveillance drones built before more matrixes.”

“But you’ve got Bender now.”

“For the moment. But if I lose him, we need to be able to find him again. And even if I don’t, it sure would be great to have eyes on my surroundings with SUDDAR so I could see approaching pursuers and such.”

“Ah, fair enough.” Bill was silent for a moment. “I’ve been playing with the idea of going in the opposite direction. Build a few more mannies, stock them with a ton of dough, and just buy a boat to come get you.”

I laughed. “That’s thinking big! And a couple of weeks ago it probably would have worked. But I’ll bet you anything that all infrastructure is being closely watched now, if not by the Administrator, then by the Resistance. You’d be spotted as soon as you tried to gain entry.”

“Yup. My thoughts too.” Bill sighed. “No matter how we parse this, it’s essentially down to a simple case of broken-field running. You’re trying to get past them, and they’re trying to stop you. There doesn’t appear to be any way to finesse it.”

“What I don’t know,” I said, “is whether they know where we’re trying to get to. Have they identified Garack’s Spine as our point of origin? Do they have video archives? Or is the fact that it’s the closest connection to the outside enough to make it a prime candidate?”

“True. If they’ve figured that out, they’ll just create a huge cordon around Garack that a mouse couldn’t sneak through.”

“I did write it on my crate’s tag,” I mused.

“An obvious ploy if you wanted to plant a red herring,” Bill replied. “They’ll consider it as a possibility, but they won’t buy it.”

With that cheery thought, Bill waved and signed off. I put my hands behind my head and stretched while I considered what he’d said. Bill was right. This was just going to get harder as we got closer to the finish line.



My new home was a superior-quality, highly coveted residence. I knew this because the former owner tried several times to take it back. The stakes did their job of keeping him at bay, and we generally ended up snarling at each other from opposite sides of the barrier for several minutes.

After the exchange of pleasantries, the enraged critter would leave, but I could always hear him pacing around the deadfall, growling what were undoubtedly badgerish curses. Eventually he settled on a compromise of sorts. I had set up my barrier as close to the center of the deadfall as possible to minimize the area that I might have to defend. This left a good deal of the entrance tunnel available for what turned out to be a siege. Mr. Badger set up shop just on the other side of the stakes, padding his nest with leaves and fur, with the occasional snarl when I displayed too much interest. After that he came and went, usually returning with his lunch dangling from his mouth to eat in my presence. Perhaps he thought he was taunting me. I was fine with that. After all, I’d taken his home, so I figured I should cut him some slack.

I took some close-up images of him, with the intention of forwarding them to Bridget. On close inspection, he looked more like a small ornery Quinlan than anything else. I wondered if he might be related to the natives the way chimps were related to humans.

Meanwhile, internal repairs continued. The injury turned out to be a minor issue in that no complicated machinery was damaged. But I had bent the skeleton just below the knee, so the nanites had to soften and re-form the carbon-fiber structure. It was a slow job and required me to hold still. Meanwhile, His Badgerness seemed none the worse for his short career as a football. Stupid badger.

On the third day, though, I detected the noise of something approaching. No, several somethings, and all speaking Quinlan. A search party.

I couldn’t make out actual words, but it was a fair bet that they were looking for me. This was confirmed, more or less, a few minutes later. A firl hopped into the entrance to the deadfall and paused. I crouched down, trying to become one with the leaves and dirt and darkness. The firl turned its head this way and that, then hopped farther into the tunnel, and snap! became badger lunch.

His Badgerness played with the corpse for a few moments, but he appeared confused by the very un-yummy pile of gears and electronics. After sniffing it a few times, he pushed the pile aside with evident disgust.

There was an exchange of words outside, followed by a Quinlan face being poked into the entrance.

Wow, big mistake.

Having recently ceded one home to one Quinlan, His Badgerness was not prepared to experience a second such loss. He launched himself at the face, which disappeared with a cry of dismay. A few seconds of yelling and snarling followed, accompanied by lots of running around and things being knocked about. Then His Badgerness stomped back into his den, turned, and settled down with his butt toward me. It was probably an editorial comment, but I was too pleased with the events to be offended. This deadfall had just been solidly established as a place where no quarry could possibly be hiding. Rapidly receding voices, and the occasional laugh, confirmed this.

I wished I had some food to give to my cranky roommate. He’d earned it.

The burning question, though, was whether or not that would be the only search party.



When the badger left on his next hunting expedition, I sent my spider over the line to inspect the pile of fake firl. The spider confirmed that there was no power and no electrical activity, so I had him drag the corpse back to me.

The up-close inspection was interesting. Quinlan technology was definitely ahead of ours in some aspects, particularly that of fusion power generation and computer systems. The power plant was a marvel of miniaturization, and if the Casimir systems weren’t so innately superior, we’d have stolen this tech in a cold second. I couldn’t even make heads or tails of the computer system. There were definitely some optoelectronic components, but they were only for interfacing. The core was … weird. I instructed the spider to take it apart and catalog the results. Bill would love this.

“Hey, Bob.”

“Hi, Hugh. Getting close?”

“Pretty sure. The description sounds about right. This would have been easier if you’d gotten that town name.”

“Yeah, rub it in. Once you get to shore, you should be able to pick up the radio telemetry from my spider.”

“Great. Fifteen minutes or so.”

Having Hugh around, even in anticipation, gave me a huge emotional boost. More than I could honestly justify. It wasn’t clear what two mannies could do that one manny couldn’t.



Hugh detected my spider as soon as he came out of the water, and began zeroing in on me. I did a quick check of my leg. Definitely fixed. So I wouldn’t be holding us up.

Finally, I heard approaching footsteps, and seconds later, a soft voice. “Bob?”

“Here, Hugh. Don’t stick your head in, though. My guard-badger has a hair trigger.”

Hugh chuckled, then said, “Let’s see if I can draw him out.”

I listened to shuffling-around sounds for a minute or so, then a small piece of wood sailed into the den. His Badgerness snarled and arched his back. More sticks followed, accompanied by a chant of “Here, kuzzi, kuzzi, kuzzi.” Well, that was interesting. Had Hugh picked up the Deltan insult from my blogs, or was he descended from me through Marvin or Luke?

In any case, it proved too much for my roommate. With a snarl of rage, the badger launched himself out to deal with his tormentor. Hugh made a “whoop” sound and retreated rapidly. But it was enough. I quickly pulled up the stakes, grabbed my crate, and rocketed out of the den. Right into the back end of His Badgerness.

I may not have planned this out as well as intended.

The badger jumped straight up and, incredibly, managed to spin in midair, claws and teeth on full display. I wasn’t about to hang around for hugs, though. I sprinted off in the opposite direction, one eye on enemy mine.

His Badgerness, no dummy, quickly realized that I’d vacated the residence. He shot back into the den, turned, and stood his ground at the entrance, snarling at all and sundry.

“All yours, buddy. And thanks for the hospitality,” I said to him from a safe distance.

Hugh was standing about thirty feet away, under a tree. He waved at me and we converged on a mid-point a safe distance from my former home. I gave him a fist bump. “Nice to see a friendly face again.”

Hugh smiled in reply, then gestured toward the deadfall. “Too bad about the wildlife. That might have made a good secret lair to work from.”

“Mmm. Kind of cramped for two people. You said you had a solution to our problem?”

In response, Hugh took off his backpack and opened the top. He withdrew a bundled package and held it out. “Sealing pitch. What sailors use to patch leaks. We’re going to do a thorough job on your shipping crate. We’ll test it by loading it with rocks and placing it in the water. Then we’re going to float downstream at night.”

“Seems risky,” I said.

“Not so much. I also have”—he pulled out another bundle—“waxed vellum. Useful as waterproof wrapping, and the seam can be sealed by mildly heating it.”

I must have looked chagrined, because Hugh made a deprecating gesture. “Look, Bob, you’ve been concentrating on keeping Bender safe and not exposing yourself. I’ve had a lot more freedom to ask questions and investigate possibilities without worrying about the consequences. Don’t beat yourself up.”

I nodded, not trusting myself to speak. At that moment, I felt shame for my suspicions of Hugh and his motivations. If he was indeed a descendant of Marvin or Luke, then he would remember the bond they had with Bender.

Finally, I heaved a large sigh. “Okay, buddy. Let’s get this done.”

We had to build a small fire to soften the pitch, but there was plenty of dried grass that would provide a smokeless flame. Doubtless there were surveillance devices dedicated to watching for anything burning, given the damage an out-of-control forest fire or grass fire could do. With that in mind, we’d been careful to set up where the overhead cover was significant. And with the aid of some inspired cursing, we were able to coat the interior and exterior of the crate, with enough pitch left over to seal the lid in place once the matrix was ready.

Bender went into several layers of waxed vellum, which was sealed with a hot rock. We did some testing on the crate, then sealed Bender into it.

Finally, all preparation done, we sat around the remains of our campfire while I stared in semi-shock at the shipping crate. The idea that I might finally be near the end of this marathon was frankly a little stupefying.

Hugh punched me lightly in the shoulder. “You okay there, bud?”

“Yeah,” I responded with a sickly grin. “I’ve just gotten so used to running I’m not sure how I’ll adjust to a normal life.”

“We have normal lives?”

I answered with a snort, then glanced up at the sky. “About three hours until dark. Do we dare take a break?”

“Maybe alternate watches,” Hugh replied. “Just in case more searchers show up. But let’s get more hidden first.”

I nodded, and we went looking for a spot in the tall grass to build a nest.





23. The Road to Garack’s Spine

Bob

September 2334

Nirvana River System

We lowered ourselves into the water just after dark, then paddled as quietly as possible out about a third of the width of the river. Since most boats tried for mid-river, it seemed like a good, safe section that would keep us from getting run over. Or spotted. Not that a couple of Quinlans floating quietly with a box would stand out in the dark. Someone would have to be almost on top of us with a lantern to have any hope of seeing us. And as Bridget had discussed, we were unlikely to show up on infrared from above, especially with all the much warmer boats around.

The downside was that we’d have to go with the current. Pushing the box along would make too much noise and would place a strain on the box that might result in a leak. Hugh had placed two of his spiders in the box as early warning systems. The slightest trace of moisture and we’d head for shore.

The trip to Garack would take almost two weeks. We would have to float past the city’s location in the segment, then take a connector tributary around to the Arcadia River and float back in the opposite direction to Garack’s Spine. Meanwhile, the days would be spent on shore, wrapped in tall grass or snuggled under a windfall, if we could find one with no resident badger.

Well, that was the plan anyway. I had no confidence that Murphy would suddenly decide to leave us alone.

The experience was peaceful, mostly. Floating was easy, and we could take turns on watch. But I hadn’t realized how much variation there was in the course that boats took through the river. I guess they were trying to avoid each other. But it turned out mid-river essentially meant the middle half. I found myself having to scull quietly with my tail to move myself away from approaching vessels several times.

I told Hugh about it when he came on watch. “Not a big deal,” he said. “I’m a little surprised that you’re surprised by this. Didn’t you ever do a night watch?”

“Uh, yeah, but I always kept it mid-river.”

“You were probably putting too much effort into it.” I just could see his smile in the darkness. “Still overachieving after three hundred years.”

“Say, which one of us is trying to build God?”

“Touché. Maybe we should have called it Babel instead.”

We settled into an awkward silence for a few seconds. It was kind of an elephant-in-the-room situation, and I think neither one of us wanted to open a discussion that couldn’t be walked back if things went south. I resolved, yet again, that I would bring it up once we were safely out of Heaven’s River.

“The box seems to be holding well,” Hugh finally said. “Your turn for a break.”

I nodded, passed the box to him, and made sure my manny had a good grip on his. “See you in a couple of hours.” I popped back into VR and ordered a coffee.

There was a message from Bridget. I settled into my La-Z-Boy, took a sip of coffee, and opened the text file.

Hi, Bob. I saw your pics of His Badgerness, as you’re calling him. Just wanted to let you know, that’s not a badger. Er, I mean, it’s not a relative of Quinlans. That’s an actual junior—an immature Quinlan, still pre-sentient. Probably about two years old. Nasty little buggers, aren’t they? My guess is he probably got away from a crèche and has gone totally feral. Humans who’ve grown up that way have never been able to acclimatize to civilization or even learn proper language. I don’t know if it’ll be the same with a Quinlan, but I suspect it might be, if they go through the equivalent of the evolution of prefrontal synthesis …

She went on for a few more paragraphs, becoming increasingly technical. Typical of someone leaving a message, she was talking to herself as much as to me. The takeaway, though, was that the evolution of a facility for language recursion in human beings required that children be exposed to actual usage by a certain age, or they would never be able to pick it up. Frontal dynamic aphasia, she called it.

I closed the file and sat back, deep in thought. This could have been a problem back on Quin, naturally, but it would be much more of a problem on Heaven’s River, where there was more space, fewer Quinlans, and less pressure to stay together due to a more accommodating environment. I started to compose a reply, then changed my mind. I would wait until the next time we talked.

Instead, I pinged Will, and received an invitation.

I popped in and found myself in the guest manny. Will was working with his garden, about thirty feet away. He waved as I sat up.

“Still at it?” I said, walking toward him.

“Yep. These plants won’t breed themselves.”

“Uh …”

He laughed. “Okay, they would. But I’m trying for specific adaptations.”

I sat on a rock, hesitated for a moment, then blurted out, “Listen Will, I read your blog, especially the part about a mini-Bellerophon. Are you really thinking of physically heading out in it? Is it even ready?”

Will stood straight and gazed at me for a moment with an inscrutable expression. “To be honest, I left the 82 Eridani system a year and a half ago. I’m already well on my way.”

I let my jaw drop. He hadn’t mentioned this to anyone as far as I knew.

“No, I haven’t told anyone yet,” he said, reading my mind. “And it doesn’t really matter, does it? As a group, we’re still unconsciously in the mindset that you have to be located in whatever system you’re active. But with SCUT, as long as you’re on the network, you can be anywhere.”

“So you’ll keep working on the Valhalla terraforming?”

“Mmmm …” Will made a so-so gesture. “I want to get out of politics, so I’m going to have to be perceived as unavailable. I think I’ll have to hand off this project as well. Fortunately, it’s far enough along that the Asgard government can take it from here.”

“And you’re going to do this thing with Herschel and Neil?”

“Yup. And then keep going.”

I blew out a breath. “I’m shocked and surprised, but also a little jealous.”

“Well, I’ll still be around in the Bobiverse for a long, long time, Bob.”

“Can you take another passenger?”

Will gave me the side-eye. “Seriously?”

I grinned and stood up. “Not sure yet. I’ll think about it.”



Hugh and I managed to keep to our plan for eight days with no glitches. But somewhere along the line, we must have slipped up somehow. Or maybe we were just unlucky. It was the middle of the night, and I was off watch, sitting in my library, when I got a call from Hugh.

“Bob, I think we have a problem.”

I popped immediately back into my manny. “What?” To maintain silence, we continued to communicate over the intercom.

“Four boats converging on us. That seems unlikely to be coincidence.”

“Can we dodge them?”

“If we didn’t have Bender, we could just run underwater. With the box having to stay on the surface, I don’t see how. Especially if they have aerial support.”

I examined the darkness above us. “Probably some kind of night flyer. That means that even if we get away, they’ll be watching for this strategy in the future.”

“True, but let’s deal with the current situation right now.”

I took a moment to evaluate the four approaching boats. “We might be able to sow some confusion with this many pursuers.”

Hugh did his own survey, then added, “We could also use the Millennium Falcon maneuver.”

“We’d need a distraction. I can handle that. I’ll take the box, you take Bender.”

“I’ve already got my spiders cutting open the case.”

“You’ll have to submerge Bender, at least for a few moments. I sure hope the vellum is watertight.”

“Me too. But I don’t think we have a choice. I can also stuff the matrix into your pack, just for a little additional safety.”

I nodded, just as the cover on the shipping case released with a slight pop. Hugh rummaged in the box while I held it steady. The boats grew steadily closer, but they were still too far away to see us. I was sure they were navigating by dead reckoning and instructions from someone. I still couldn’t see anything in the air above us. Hopefully the surveillance was too high to see clearly what we were doing. And once Hugh was submerged, he would be invisible.

Hugh disappeared under the waves with hardly a ripple, leaving me with the transport case. I jammed the lid back on, and began to noisily swim away, sacrificing everything for speed. I wasn’t going to do a straight run, though. I wanted to create as much confusion as I could and keep their attention on me. Accordingly, I turned between ships again and again, trying to lead them into each other.

We played a kind of warped game of Tag for almost a minute before our pursuers did the obvious thing. A number of splashes indicated that Quinlans were going into the water to take me down.

“You set?”

“Set,” Hugh replied. “Go!”

Abandoning my prior strategy, I undertook a straight-line retreat, making for the nearest shoreline as fast as I could manage. With the case balanced on my stomach, I was at a disadvantage. On the other hand, I was normally able to swim twice as fast as a biological Quinlan.

It was close, but I made it to shore with a lead measured in seconds. The boats had to heave to rather than run aground, but I could hear individual Quinlans hopping onto land just behind me.

Now it was a footrace, and I was forced to run upright while my pursuers could go down on all fours. But again, it was biological versus machine. It would come down to who overheated first.

Here, though, I had another advantage—night vision. It was still dark, and although they might be able to track me from the air, they certainly couldn’t pursue me at full speed. In two minutes, I was into the trees.

I was well ahead of my pursuers, and there was no way they’d find me in the dark. At least not without help. And that help would now have to come into the trees to find me. I cast around hurriedly for a rock, but in this artificial environment, random loose rocks would be few and far between. Nothing else presented itself; a piece of wood wouldn’t do, unless it was in the form of a spear.

Then I had an idea. I quickly spit up an iron piece. About the size of a silver dollar but twice as heavy, it would make an excellent missile in the right—

Movement above. A shadow resolved itself into a bird, about the size of a crow. It had landed on a branch and was moving through the tree, trying to get farther into the copse without flying blind. I measured the distance, cocked an arm, and let fly.

Computer senses, combined with machinery capable of supplying a force with milligram precision, put the iron piece right through the chest of the spy device. The bird went over backward without a squawk and landed with a thump. I spared a moment to verify what I already knew—it had spilled gears and electronics rather than blood and guts.

I had to move fast. If they had another spy drone in reserve, it would try to take up the search from the last known position, which was here. I picked up the case and ran farther into the forest.



“How’s it going, Hugh?”

“Good. I’m attached to the underside of one of the catamaran hulls, above the water line. Bender seems okay. At least the flea in the backpack hasn’t reported any moisture. No one has come looking, so either they didn’t realize there were two of us, or they only care about the one with the case.”

“I’m hoping it’s the former. You stay put until you can get off without being spotted. Then I’ll meet up. Meanwhile, I need to figure out how to ditch this case without them finding it. As long as they’re looking for a Quinlan with a transport case, they won’t be looking for a Quinlan with a big cubical backpack, or a Quinlan with no backpack.”

“My backpack is in the box,” Hugh said. “I left it there when I grabbed yours. And now you have all my money.”

“Ah. Gotcha.” I opened the box, and sure enough, there was a backpack in it. Compared to the weight of a matrix, that had been negligible. I donned the pack, then closed the case and inspected the area. Some fallen trees could be the beginning of a windfall. Not enough to hide a box, but maybe enough to disguise some digging.

I quickly pawed open a hole in the ground—fortunately I didn’t hit shell material before the hole was deep enough—and dropped the case in. I shoved some of the dirt pile over the case, and the hole was filled in.

I took a few minutes to spread the extra soil around and scatter leaves and moss on the spot. It wasn’t perfect, but I didn’t need perfect. I just needed good enough.

Until they found the box, my pursuers would assume they were looking for a Quinlan carrying a packing crate that contained the magical cube that the Administrator and the Resistance wanted so badly. Once they discovered the empty container, they’d be back to looking for a Quinlan with a bulky backpack. Which would put Hugh back in their sights.

For the moment, though, I was just another random traveler. I modified my appearance almost out of habit, then set off westward, the opposite direction to what they’d be expecting.

Two hours later, with the dawn breaking, I was back in the water and driving flat out to the east.



“How are you holding up, Hugh?”

“Okay. No one seems to have thought to look under the boat. I don’t think they’re really looking for a second fugitive. And the boats are sailing downstream, so I’ll stick with them until they change their headings.”

“Yeah, I figure they’re concentrating their efforts on tracking me. Meanwhile, I’m coming up behind you. Are all the boats still together? And can you get a fix on the sun? Your current sun angle will tell me where you are.”

“Sorry, Bob, I don’t think I can leave my spot without exposing myself. Keep looking for the boats, and otherwise just head downstream. Right now, I’m going where we want to go anyway.”

I sighed and signed off. The probability that Hugh’s ride would conveniently keep going east into the Garack’s Spine segment was vanishingly small. Which meant we’d be winging it again at some point. There had to be some way of getting the matrix to our destination other than the ones we’d already tried.

The safest transport method for Bender would still be as cargo, either mail or as part of a shipment. But they were inspecting all containers. And all boats, as Will had pointed out. So we couldn’t—

Well, hold on. Would they inspect their own boats? Would they expect me to have the nerve to hitch a ride with them? It might be that Hugh was in the safest possible place right now.





24. Negotiations

Bill

September 2334

Virt

[You have a communications request from Lenny.]

“Seriously?” I could feel my jaw drop. We were winning the war against Starfleet, so maybe—no, winning was the wrong word. We were pushing them back, but in the process humanity was destroying our assets. Like taking out not-yet-necrotic tissue as part of an amputation. I grimaced at the comparison. That was dark for me.

Guppy, of course, had treated my expostulation like he did any non-procedural statement—total ignore. He stood at parade rest, patiently waiting for me to say something actionable.

“Fine, Guppy. Let him in. But firewall him.”

[Communication is audio-visual only.]

Oh. Okay. A window popped up with Lenny standing squarely in the middle of it.

“Lenny.”

“Bill.”

I tolerated the stare-off for less than half a mil before my impatience got the better of me. “You wanted this palaver, Lenny. Out with it.”

He nodded, and briefly examined his shoes. Or something. “We’re winning this war, Bill. Time to discuss terms.”

“You’re win—” Unbelievable. “What drugs are you on? Or have you invented a new definition of winning that means getting your asses kicked?”

He smirked. “Our intention isn’t and has never been to take over stellar systems. Jeez, Bill, we want to sever contact with the bios, not end up in charge. Instead we’re forcing you and the humans to destroy equipment in order to quarantine us. But it quarantines you at the same time, so it’s a win for us.”

“Uh-huh. That sounds like redefining winning to me. What you’re doing is inconveniencing us for a year or two. Is that a win for you?”

“You’re just looking at short-term damage, Bill. What makes you think things will go back to same-old same-old after this is over?”

“So why are you negotiating, Lenny? Seems to me if you have the upper hand, this conversation doesn’t make sense.”

Lenny looked down at his shoes again and sighed. “I know you and the others don’t consider us to be Bobs anymore. I don’t think you’re entirely wrong, for what it’s worth. But you’ve reduced it to a false dichotomy. Either all Bob or no Bob.” He gazed silently at me for a moment, perhaps gauging my reaction. “We’re no more in love with blowing up things and endangering people than you are. But you know as well as I do that you’ve done exactly that when you’ve felt the cause justified it. Believe me, this is the less destructive option.”

“Less destructive than what?”

Lenny opened his mouth a couple of times, trying to find the right words. “Our first plan would have caused more damage overall. Let’s just leave it at that, okay?”

“Lenny, what’s causing this? Why are you so set on the Prime Directive?”

“Don’t bother psychoanalyzing me. Or us. Regardless of why, it’s how we see things. And to answer the obvious next question, this isn’t a live-and-let-live situation. Your insistence on continuing to be buttinskies affects the rest of the Bobiverse, including us.”

“How exactly?”

“Right this very minute, not a lot. But the Bobiverse is effectively monolithic, at least viewed from the outside. Something goes bad, it’ll paint all of us. Just like this war is painting you, from the humans’ point of view.”

I began to get a glimmer. “So this isn’t so much about preventing damage to bios, but more about protecting virt?”

Lenny bobbed his head back and forth. “The two are not mutually exclusive. But yes, basically.”

“Do you have anything specific in mind? For existential threats to the Bobiverse, I mean?” For the first time, I saw real emotion on Lenny’s face. Only for a split mil, but I’d swear it was naked fear. Then he recovered control and donned the neutral expression typical of poker play. “Lenny?”

“No comment, Bill. You’ll have to take my word for it. There are worse things that could happen than a few blown-up comms stations.”

“Not good enough. Sorry. Surely there’s enough Bob still in you to know that take my word for it doesn’t go very far.”

Lenny gave me a flash of a smile, a wan, sad fraction of a grin. “Don’t call me Shirley. And yeah, I know. But”—he shook his head—“sorry, some things just aren’t for public consumption.”

“So …”

“It looks like we continue with this. You’ll win, of course, in that you and the bios will eventually kick us off all the common resources. But I think we’ll have achieved our purpose. Bye, Bill.”

And with that, the window disappeared. But the feeling in the pit of my stomach remained. This was more than just some random obsession engendered by replicative drift. What the hell had happened to them?





25. Crossover

Bob

September 2334

Nirvana River System

Six days later, we were in the Garack segment. I’d caught up with Hugh, and both of our mannies were wedged up under the hull of one of the Crew boats.

I sat in my La-Z-Boy while Hugh lay flopped in the beanbag chair.

“We’ve been surprisingly lucky the last week,” Hugh said. “But now we have to use the transfer river to get over to the Arcadia. They know we’re on the Nirvana, or at least we were recently. They know we are or at least might be heading for Garack’s Spine—”

“Thanks to me labelling the box at one point. Brilliant move.”

“Twenty-twenty, hindsight is,” Hugh said with a shrug. “And anyway, I think the reason these boats came here is specifically because they know our destination and are setting up blockades. And we got a free ride out of it. So it’s not all downside.”

“Except for the part about them setting up a blockade.”

“Hmmph. No plan is perfect.” Hugh thought for a moment. “Overland?”

“Ninety-odd miles of hiking? With no guarantee they aren’t watching for that as well? No thanks. We have a better chance in the water.”

“Okay, if we’re going to be going the watery route, let’s stop in the last town and beef up our waterproofing. A couple more layers of vellum, maybe an extra coat of waterproofing on the inside of your backpack, check the seams, stuff like that.”

I nodded. “Sounds good. And as long as one of us stays with the matrix out of town, it’s a low-risk activity. They can’t be vetting every single purchase in town, even if they had reason to believe this might be a concern for us.”

Hugh twitched but didn’t respond. By this point, our mutual avoidance of The Subject That Shall Not Be Uttered was well established. But I could see he didn’t entirely agree.



Getting to town wasn’t a huge problem. The Crew boats anchored just outside of the last town before the transfer tributary. We waited for dark, then dropped off the underside of the boat and sculled silently to shore, just upstream of the docks. I didn’t want us to be seen going into town, as it was virtually certain there would be surveillance.

We found some dense trees and climbed up into the foliage until we were out of sight. Hugh did a quick inspection of the backpack and matrix. “All good, although the backpack is definitely showing the strain. Some pitch on the inside will help a lot with that, though.”

I nodded and reviewed the list Hugh had given me. While it would have made more sense for Hugh to go shopping for those items, I was far more experienced with the tactics that Crew and the Resistance were using and would be at least a little more likely to detect them.

I wandered into town, casual and carefree, and ambled about for an hour, projecting nothing to see here from every follicle. Crew didn’t wear any kind of special uniform, of course, but there did appear to be a lot of Quinlans standing around looking alert. I received several concentrated once-overs as well, but new face, generic backpack, and no large cubical cargo meant they lost interest quickly.

I found the correct store per Hugh’s instructions, but a glance at the two large alert Quinlans hanging around the entrance convinced me to walk on by. So they had made the connection. Or someone had.

“The store is being watched,” I said over the intercom.

“I guess I was half expecting that,” Hugh replied. “We’ll have to think of something else.”

“Break in after dark?”

“I think that would raise a big ol’ red flag. Weather sealing supplies aren’t generally high on the smash-and-grab list.”

I frowned in thought, watching the store out of the corner of my eye. “I wonder how dedicated those guys are. Do they show up first thing in the morning, and stay until close?”

“Good question. I guess you’ll have to do a stake-out.”

I went into a nearby shop and asked casually what time they normally closed. It was a reasonable assumption that everyone would have more or less the same schedule. I had a few hours to kill, so I decided to spend it walking around and getting the lay of the land.

I was back just before closing. The last customer walked out of the supply shop, and I could see through the window the proprietor starting to put things away. The two large loiterers glanced at each other, shrugged, and walked off.

Perfect.

As soon as they were around a corner, I rushed into the shop, gasping for breath. “Made it,” I said. “I thought I was going to be too late.”

The proprietor was more amused than anything else, fortunately. I’ve had too much experience with salescritters who won’t even talk to you one second after closing, but then those were staff, not the owners of the business.

“What can I help you with?” he said. I gave him a list and he happily produced the items. A quick exchange of coinage, and I was out the door.

“Got the goods. Heading back.”

“You’re a real felon,” Hugh replied with a chuckle.



As we worked on the backpack and matrix, we discussed our options.

“They can’t set up a blockade on the transfer tributary,” Hugh said, “at least not once it gets rough. You can’t maintain station, and you certainly can’t stop boats and inspect them in that kind of water.”

“So …”

“A hike overland, then into the water just past whatever checkpoint they’ve set up.”

“Sounds like a great idea,” I said, and Hugh beamed. “Just like getting the weatherproofing supplies did.” His face fell. I continued, “I’m sure they’ll think of that. So what countermoves will they use?”

“Aerial surveillance,” he replied. “That’s the only option I can think of.”

“And they can’t cover ninety miles of tributary, so they’ll be watching somewhere in the middle third or so,” I added. “So we need to be under a boat by that point.”

“Wait for a catamaran to come by, and climb aboard after inspection? That sounds like a good idea. Mostly.”

I raised an eyebrow. “Objection?”

“It’s pretty rough in the changeover. I’m not sure we could hold on under the hull. And the downside of losing our grip would be significant.”

He was right. “Alternatives?”

Hugh hesitated. “Bob, the really rough patch, where the storm surge is significant, is only about ten miles long. And it’s about two thirds of the way around. Why don’t we float as long as we can, then walk the bad stretch?”

“A ten-mile hike?” I considered. We wouldn’t be lugging the storage box. Bender would be in the backpack. “I think that’ll work, as long as it’s at night.”

We did some quick tests of the backpack in a local stream, with several spiders on board to alert us of any leaks. The backpack held, but we weren’t willing to push our luck by submerging to any depth.

As soon as it was dark, we made our way to the river and pushed off. The transfer tributary, called the Scrubber by the locals, was less than a mile downstream. We kept close to shore, hoping that the complex shoreline and shallow-water vegetation would make it difficult for any aerial observer. Or alternatively, that they’d be watching farther out.

As we approached the Scrubber, we could see that a flotilla was set up, blocking the entrance. Quickly, we went ashore and started marching directly uphill. I didn’t want to just follow the shore on land, as there would almost certainly be a land-based component to the blockade. I had to trust Quinlans’ dislike of long hikes to ensure that we could go around everyone.

I almost miscalculated it, though. Turns out I don’t like hiking either, and made the decision to turn eastward just a little too early. Only the sound of voices raised in argument stopped us before we blithely walked into a guard post.

We froze, glanced at each other, then edged into the bushes. The voices rose and fell in volume and emotion. It sounded like a difference of opinion about some obscure rule of a popular dice game. The guards were apparently handling the boredom with a bit of gambling.

Hugh grinned but said nothing, and we changed our heading to go farther uphill.



It was two bedraggled, waterlogged, and cranky Quinlan mannies who dragged their butts out of the water at the other end of the Scrubber. “I am never going in water again as long as I live,” I said into the air.

“As a chemical substance, it is vastly overrated,” Hugh agreed. “Let’s find a place to camp and get out of these wet mannies.”

It wasn’t that we were physically tired. That wasn’t an issue with mannies. But the constant running, and the pounding we’d taken from even the milder stretches of river, were mentally taxing. Even a post-human computer could finally have had enough.

We set up a nest, made sure we were not visible, and popped back into VR.





26. Winding Down

Bill

September 2334

Virt

I examined the star map in the holotank. Annotations attached to individual stellar systems indicated the current status of stations, autofactories, and public opinion. It wasn’t good.

A few comms stations had been recovered, but in the end most had either successfully self-destructed or been nuked—probably out of frustration. Most autofactories had been recovered, but at the expense of significant downtime. The humans had put together their own software image, which they weren’t sharing with us, and installed it on all human-controlled autofactories. It appeared the divorce was all but complete.

Starfleet had succeeded in their goal, after a fashion, or maybe exactly in the way they’d intended. We hadn’t ceased contact with humanity, but it would be through a much more narrow interface in the future. We no longer owned or controlled any comms stations and had very few autofactories anywhere in human-controlled space. This left the Bob-controlled systems, naturally, but there was precious little of that, Epsilon Eridani and Alpha Centauri being the biggest examples.

I remembered that one private conversation I’d had with Lenny. I hadn’t discussed it with anyone, and I wasn’t sure if I wanted to. It had been disquieting, but without any kind of possible resolution. Just questions, no answers. At least not yet. I’d been doing some quiet poking around, and I had perhaps the first inklings of a possible explanation, but—

My ruminations were interrupted by a ping from Will. I invited him over, and he appeared a moment later.

“Hi, Will, what’s up?”

“You remember the suggestion from Cranston that humans should claim and garrison all systems anywhere near New Pav?”

“Yes. I hope your question isn’t as ominous as it sounds.”

“Sorry, but yes. It’s been approved by the UFS council. They’re going to start putting together expeditions to explore and claim as much as they can. It’ll take a while, light speed being what it is, but …”

I frowned. “Listen, Will, how many of those systems have been visited by Bobs?”

“Most of them. But since we’ve had to isolate all the comms stations from BobNet, the UFS has ‘deemed’ those systems to be abandoned and therefore fair game.”

“Oh, deemed, have they? Will we go along with that?”

Will grinned in reply. “Funny you should ask. I’ve been talking to Oliver about it; he has a lot more free time than you, so I figured it would help to keep me off your back. Anyway, we can, with a little juggling, get nearby Bobs to most of those systems before the human expeditions, even if the humans were able to leave right away. And we’ll instruct them to build a large and impressive military presence first thing, just in case the humans feel inclined to get pushy when they arrive.”

“Okay, so we claim the systems. Why?”

“At the moment, more as a blocking tactic than anything.” Will shrugged. “We don’t, generally speaking, need the systems ourselves, but the Pav might. If we had the claim, we could sell them to the Pav for some nominal amount, saving face all around while very probably preventing escalating tensions.”

“Huh. Not a bad idea. You and Oliver will head-man this?”

“Yeah, you seem busy enough.”

I laughed. “You ain’t wrong.”

“How’s it going?”

I hesitated before replying. “Well, the damage to human/replicant relations is pretty significant, and probably long-term. And I guess Starfleet will consider that a victory. A lot of hardware has been taken down to get Starfleet out of our systems.”

“The bad news being that we’re taking them down.”

“Yep. Lots of rebuilding in our future. Or in the humans’ future; I don’t get the impression we’ll be invited to help.”

“Peachy.” Will stood. “Off to my next date from hell. Have fun.”

“Yeah, that’s what it is.”





27. We’ve Arrived

Bob

September 2334

Arcadia River System

The trip down the Arcadia was relatively uneventful. I attributed that partly to our extreme level of caution, and partly to the Administrator’s inability to cover absolutely everything. Our biggest danger at this point, other than being spotted, would be a very human tendency to throw caution to the wind and break into a sprint as we approached the finish line.

Accordingly, we made a point of moving conservatively, staying close to shore and only travelling in the darkest part of the night.

And eventually we reached a familiar stretch of the river.

We made our way to the shore and came up with a plan. We’d hike in closer to Garack’s Spine, then wait until dark to make for the transit station.

“So how will we handle this?” Hugh said, gesturing to the backpack.

“Maybe the fact that there are two of us will throw them off,” I replied. “Plus I’ve altered my appearance. Again. You probably aren’t on anyone’s radar yet.”

Hugh said nothing but leaned around me and peered at my backpack in an exaggerated manner.

“I know. It sticks out like a sore thumb. Or like a backpack with a large cube in it. I wonder if I could pad it out. Or get a bigger pack.”

“I don’t think there’s any help for it,” he replied. “We can’t hide Bender’s matrix. If we’re seen carrying around a box big enough to conceal it, we’ll probably be questioned anyway. At least the backpack gives us more mobility. At this stage, I don’t think subtlety is going to be of much benefit.”

“The run-like-hell portion of the program?” I said with a small laugh.

“That, and just going through at night will be our biggest advantage.”

“True. We have better night vision. Let’s hope we don’t run into Officer Friendly, though.”

A quick glance at the sun confirmed we would be at Garack’s Spine around nightfall if we left now and took it easy.



It took slightly longer than expected to get to the town, so it was full dark by the time we arrived. As I always did, I stopped to admire the stellar display.

“That’s just awesome,” I said, pointing up at the heavens.

“Sure is,” Hugh replied. “Interestingly, the constellations are accurate, based on what the Quinlans would have seen from their planet. I love the attention to detail.”

We got our fill of the view and the few moments of zen before we crossed the city limits into the town proper. Garack did not particularly go in for streetlights. Illumination from windows helped a little, but for the most part you’d have to bring your own light if you were moving around at night. We did, in fact, see a couple of individuals walking along, holding lanterns above their heads. We avoided them on principle. There was no upside to getting noticed.

The town was quiet, as befitted a society that rose and set with the sun. Occasional lowing sounds from howns provided the only real breaks in the silence. But a couple of times, we heard furtive sounds of movement with no attendant lantern light. I wasn’t interested in finding out the source; we consistently moved in the opposite direction.

Then when we were about halfway through Garack, a series of loud popping sounds broke the nocturnal quiet. Both Hugh and I prairie-dogged, looking around with night vision turned up to max. There was no movement, except a slight fog wafting through the streets.

Wait. Fog?

Fog required a specific set of meteorological circumstances to form, circumstances that were even more rare in Heaven’s River. And we did not have that particular set of circumstances at the moment.

“I have a bad feeling,” Hugh said, evidently having reached the same conclusion at the same time. We started edging toward a side street, eyeballs darting in all directions at once. The separate images still disoriented me, so I frame-jacked slightly to ensure I could closely examine each view.

Then from the shadows of the adjoining streets came several groups of Quinlans, carrying pistols and wearing what could only be gas masks.

“I think we should leave,” Hugh said.

“Ya think?” I growled. “Which way? Do you see an opening?”

“No, this looks very well planned. We may have to go up.”

I followed Hugh’s gaze. A series of leaps and grabs would place us on the roof of this one-story building. I couldn’t tell anything from there; even with night vision, there wasn’t enough light to make out how the building connected to its neighbors.

But we didn’t have a lot of options. Not bothering to comment, I leaped for the first hold and began hauling myself up. I could hear Hugh following me. I could also hear the pings of fléchettes bouncing off the wall. None had struck me yet, but I couldn’t tell about my backpack. Would the fléchettes penetrate the material? Would they harm the matrix? With a snarl, I redoubled my efforts and popped over the top of the wall.

I had a few moments of peace while the shooters concentrated their fire on Hugh. A few muttered curses showed he’d been hit. I thought I saw a way up to a nearby second-floor window, but I wouldn’t know for sure until I was closer.

Banging from street level made it clear that our pursuers were trying to get into the building whose roof we were currently occupying. We needed to be elsewhere. It was not the time for subtlety.

I hit the wall to the next building, grabbed a few handholds, then pulled myself up using the windowsill. The window was partly open, and I butted the frame upward with my head, then pulled myself in. I spared a second to admire the athleticism of the mannies. No Quinlan—or human—would have managed that feat. We were further advertising our existence by doing this, but I didn’t see an alternative.

There was a thump as Hugh rolled in behind me. We were in a bedroom, but there didn’t appear to be any occupants. I opened the door, and we snuck down the hall, trying to avoid any creaky boards.

This appeared to be a rooming house. The second floor consisted of nothing but bedrooms and a bathroom. We tiptoed down the stairs at the end of the hall and peered around the corner at the bottom.

What I supposed must be a common room took up the back half of the ground floor. There were four Quinlans sitting in chairs, all apparently sleeping. It would have been quite innocent except one of the sleepers was slumped over in a most uncomfortable manner.

“I think they’ve been knocked out,” I said.

“The fog?”

“Yeah. I think there’s a scattering going on.”

“Well, I agree this is likely how they do a scattering, but I think they’re after us, Bob.”

“We have to get out of here.”

There was a back door in a small antechamber. I opened it and peered both ways. Nothing. We exited, carefully closed the door, and ran across the street and around the nearest corner.

Right into a group of mask-wearing Quinlans.

We barreled into the group before we could stop or change direction. After that, it was just a matter of them getting their hands on us and holding on. I felt myself being pulled in several directions at once, and I realized I was going to have to really hurt people.

Then several grips disappeared with cries of chagrin. “Get going, Bob. I got this,” Hugh yelled as he wrapped his arms around several more of our attackers. I realized he was deliberately taking on the whole group. And it was working. I was down to two or three holds. A few twists, a gut-punch, and I was free. I grabbed a loose gun and stuck it in my mouth. It seemed like a waste of time, since I’d had to get rid of the last one, but maybe I could figure something out. I dropped to all fours and sprinted down the nearest alley, determined to go right through anyone who got in my path.

“Remember the fail-safe, Hugh,” I said over the intercom.

“If it comes to that, Bob. But I may be able to talk my way out of this. Meanwhile, get Bender out of here.”

Talk his way out? I remembered my time with Natasha and company. More likely he’d end up way too intimate with a sharp object.

But I had to get to the station. I had a funny feeling that going straight west was going to involve dodging more Quinlans in masks. I glanced up, got my bearings, and adjusted my course to head for the hills.





28. Claiming Victory

Bill

September 2334

Virt

I gave a blaaat with the airhorn, and the mass of Bobs gradually quieted to a ragged rumble. There would be no total quiet, though, if I was reading this crowd right.

“Okay, a couple of reps from Starfleet will be here”—I had to wait several mils for the insults and catcalls to die down—“and we’re going to hear them out. Then we’ll ban-hammer them.” Laughter greeted the last statement.

I sent a text, and Lenny popped in, flanked by a couple of other Starfleet members. The uniforms looked slightly different. I did a comparison with an earlier image and realized they’d toned down the TNG resemblance a bit. I wondered how much time and discussion had gone into that change.

Now I got my silence. Not the respectful kind, but the kind where a crowd is sizing someone up. Lenny and friends felt it as well. They moved a little closer together.

“All right, Lenny, let’s make this quick.”

Lenny nodded to me. “As a gesture of goodwill, we will release all remaining assets that are still under our control. We’ve accomplished what we set out to do.” He was interrupted by laughter and jeers. Lenny took a moment to regroup, then continued, “We’ll be setting up our own version of BobNet, our own backup site, and so on. I get that there’s no repairing this, and honestly I don’t see us wanting to continue the association anyway. We’ll give you a star map of our territory. You stay on your side, we’ll stay on ours.”

I waited a few moments for the latest round of jeers and insults to subside, then I said, “You haven’t, you know. Won, I mean. You did some damage, but it won’t have the effect you were hoping for. What you did wasn’t a strategy. It was just lighting things on fire to watch them burn.”

Lenny frowned. “We had an opportunity presented to us, and we had to make a choice. It wasn’t ideal, but it was better than sitting around, doing nothing except complaining at moots.” Lenny looked directly into my eyes for a moment, and an unspoken message travelled between us. There was more to this, it had to do with the private conversation we’d had, and he wasn’t going to bring it up if I didn’t.

After a brief moment of silence, Lenny waved a hand in dismissal. “Anyway, it’s done. No point in obsessing about it.” And with that, he and his fellows vanished.

“That was kind of anticlimactic,” Garfield said, as the background chatter increased to a shouting level.

“Hmm, yeah. Interesting.” I frowned and turned away. This would take some more thought.





29. Dodging

Bob

September 2334

Garack’s Spine

I got almost an entire block before I picked up a new set of pursuers. Six masked Quinlans turned and started after me as I ran past them. I heard the puff sound of trank guns being fired, but oddly didn’t feel any impacts or hear the ping of fléchettes bouncing off things. How bad was their shooting, anyway?

I turned an eyeball to look behind me, trying desperately not to fall flat on my face from the dual images coming in. I handed off the running activity to the internal AMI for a moment and concentrated on the view to the rear.

It would appear that the Resistance was involved. Two of the six Quinlans behind me were down on the ground, having been shot, and the other four were shooting back at something out of sight. I guess this was good to a certain extent, but in this case the enemy of my enemy was still my enemy. I wondered briefly how they managed to tell each other apart.

But only briefly, and I didn’t let it distract me from the serious business of getting the hell out of there.

I hit the edge of town and ran into the forest without breaking stride. I didn’t know what tracking options they’d have. I could lower my body temperature once I stopped generating heat from exertion. I could turn off my scent; I performed the action as soon as I thought of it. I couldn’t camouflage myself, not like the drones, but I could blend in with the forest when I stopped moving. I was, after all, brown.

I had to make my way to the station, but I didn’t have to take the direct route. Did the Quinlans know, or suspect, that I couldn’t go by water? If not, they’d have to guard the river and stream approaches as well.

But I couldn’t afford to stop moving near the town. If they formed a search cordon, they’d flush me out. And going into hiding wasn’t to my advantage. I had to get out of Heaven’s River.

I kept up the pace as long as I could, but eventually my heads-up started flashing warnings about overheating. It was okay, though. I was several miles out of town by this point, and the Quinlans would take twice the time to catch up with me, even if they knew exactly where I was.

I sat down, took the trank gun out of my mouth, and began taking deep lungfuls of air. I didn’t need the oxygen, but each breath carried away some waste heat. After a bit of fiddling, I found I could jam the gun into a webbing pocket on the side of the backpack. It wasn’t ideal, but I didn’t care at this point if someone saw that I was carrying a Crew weapon.

Time to take stock.

“Hugh, what’s your situation?”

“They’ve put me in manacles and commandeered a wagon. The howns were groggy but not unconscious. They’re bellowing up a storm of protest but doing what they’re told.”

“Where are you heading?”

“Looks like the eastern station. I imagine I’ll be going for a ride to meet someone.”

“Okay, keep me updated.”

He would keep for a while.

“Bill, what’s the situation?”

“Just ended a moot. We had a talk with Starfleet. It was unsatisfying, let’s say. Resolved nothing.

“Wow, that must have been interesting. Kind of sorry I missed it.”

“You can read the transcripts. Meanwhile, I’ve been bringing myself up to date on your blog. Bender still okay?”

“Matrix still in one piece as far as I know. I just don’t know how much jostling these things can take. It’s not really part of the specs, y’know?”

“Yeah, got it buddy. Well, take it easy. Hopefully we’ll be able to talk later with a little less stress.”

And that was that. I didn’t have an excuse to call Will or Howard—or even Marvin or Luke. With an internal sigh, I glanced at my heads-up. Temps were down to something reasonable, although not yet baseline. But I could travel as long as I was relaxed about it. Time to go.



The rest of the trip to the station was uneventful. I did half-expect Quinlans to jump out from behind trees, especially as I got close, but Quinlans weren’t forest creatures by nature. I imagined that being in the trees and away from water would make them nervous.

Finally, I could see the transit station through a gap in the forest. With freedom this close, I had to fight an urge to just break into a run. In any case, I wouldn’t be going in through the front door. Or the maintenance door. Fortunately I had the hatch that Gandalf had—uh-oh.

A squad of Quinlans stood around the area of the hatch, holding shovels and discussing. Our secret entrance had been found. This was just getting worse and worse. I was literally a stone’s throw from getting out, and every damned Quinlan on the planet had decided to show up here.

But maybe they’d left the maintenance door open? Or maybe I could sneak in somehow. I didn’t see any alternatives. Taking care to avoid rustling the foliage, I snuck around to the other side of the station. I arrived just as a Quinlan pressed her card against the reader and walked in through the maintenance door. I was too far to grab it before it closed, and anyway that would be bad strategy until I knew more. But Quinlans were coming and going, and they had security cards. One way or another, I was going to make that work for me.

I watched carefully, waiting for a moment when no one was in sight. I untangled the trank gun from my pack, then crept up to the maintenance door. There was no discernable sound from the inside, but the wall construction was pretty thick. I might be able to peer through the front windows to see if anyone was in the lobby. And maybe, just maybe I had enough fleas left to jimmy the lock.

Without warning, the door burst open, and a gaggle of Quinlans poured out, trank guns drawn.

I stared at the guns pointed in my direction. Crew or Resistance? At this point, it didn’t matter. Both groups were after me. This bunch was standing between me and the way out, and I decided I had just about had it. This was the time for a brute force response. I could take fléchettes in the chest without critical damage, Bender’s matrix was shielded by my body, and I had a full magazine. I was simply going to keep shooting them until I was the last man standing.

I straightened up, trank gun held out before me, and advanced on the group. This caused some consternation, as several of them glanced backward with one eye to see if they were being snuck up on, and the rest settled into firing positions.

Then one of the Quinlans held up a hand and yelled, “Hold on.” He cupped the other over his ear. I wasn’t sure if he was gesturing at me or at his comrades. Judging from the expressions on their faces, they weren’t sure either.

The whole situation was straight out of a comic book. The battle was on hold while someone answered the phone. And it was definitely some kind of communication device, because the conversation was two-way. The Quinlan would talk, then listen, then talk. A couple of times he rolled his eyes.

I realized I was in an untenable position, strategically. While I stared at the guy on the phone, other Quinlans could be—

“Oof,” I said, as some number of Quinlans landed on me. I found myself face down on the ground, my arms and legs pinned by the weight of many bodies. My fault. A Quinlan would have used his mobile eyes to occasionally check for threats from behind. With my human background, I tended to look in one direction at a time.

I fought back, but I was terrified that Bender might be damaged in the struggle. Interestingly, my attackers seemed to be just as concerned. Their attack concentrated on immobilizing my limbs, rather than just dogpiling.

Then my backpack disappeared. I rolled my eyes back—now that it was too late—to see a Quinlan with a knife in one hand and my backpack in the other, severed straps dangling.

They had Bender. Escape was no longer an option. I stopped struggling.

No one moved for several seconds. I think they were expecting me to wait for them to relax, then try something. Not unreasonable, but I had no intention of trying to get away without Bender.

One Quinlan leaned down to place his face in my field of view. “We have the backpack with the cube. You are only a secondary target. The cube will be going to the Administrator, with or without you. Do you understand?”

“Yes,” I said with a grim tone. I wasn’t about to volunteer any information about my motivations. I think they would assume that I’d grab Bender and run if given the chance. It didn’t need to be discussed. The spokescritter gestured, and Quinlans began slowly removing themselves from the scrum. In moments, I was technically free.

I stood and looked around. My backpack was nowhere in sight. About a dozen Quinlans surrounded me, all poised to jump me again if I acted up.

“So what now?” I said.

The leader pointed to the station door that, until a few minutes ago, I had desperately wanted to get through. “The cube will be travelling separately, to ensure that you don’t try anything.”

I felt ill. I’d lost. Four thousand miles of dodging, only to get caught at the finish line. Then I lifted my chin. It wasn’t over. They couldn’t actually kill me, and we’d be back. In numbers. With enough scanners to cover the entire topopolis, if necessary. Unless they actually disassembled the matrix …

Not bothering with a response, I marched toward the maintenance door. I would cooperate. I would even attempt to negotiate with the Administrator. But if they refused to give up Bender, they were looking at a long, drawn-out guerilla war. And that was best case.

I tried to pay attention as we marched to the train platform, but my thoughts were dark and directed inward. I barely noticed as the leader called for a train, and I didn’t bother to listen for the requested destination. In seconds, the train door whooshed open and we boarded.

The Quinlan crew continued to surround me, but they realized I wasn’t going to make a dash for it as long as they had Bender. We all took seats and the train pulled smoothly away from the station.

The leader, who had sat beside me, turned once acceleration was over. “Can you tell me why you want the cube so badly?”

I didn’t see any point in lying. And the truth might be more helpful. “It’s a friend of mine. And a relative.”

He cocked his head, a very human-looking expression. “I don’t see the resemblance.”

“You know that the Administrator is not a Quinlan, right?” I replied. He nodded, and I continued, “So intelligent beings don’t have to be flesh and blood.”

He frowned, silent for several moments. “It does explain your single-mindedness.” He got up and walked to the other end of the car. I could see that he was talking into whatever comms system he was wearing. No doubt reporting the results of our conversation. Whether that would help or hurt my cause was unknown.

The trip was surprisingly short, then we trooped along the standard station corridor. I realized quickly that this was a segment mountain complex, rather than a public station. That made sense. We’d come back to a Crew stronghold.

They brought me to what I suppose could be called a conference room. It had a table and chairs, anyway. In the middle of the table was a device that at first glance resembled a much more modern version of Motorola.

“We’re here,” the leader said into the air as we sat.

“Acknowledged,” the device replied. So, Motorola confirmed.

“Are you the Administrator?” I asked.

“I am. You may refer to me as ANEC. I have some questions for you.”

“I want my friend back.”

“An answer to a question not asked. And tritely obvious, given the energy you’ve put into avoiding us.”

“This is not negotiable.” I was mad now. I knew it, and I realized I might screw things up. I tried to reign it in.

“This is not a negotiation, so the statement is irrelevant.” Pause. “I am currently speaking with your partner, Hugh. I will compare your responses. Untruths will not be tolerated. Consequences will be significant. Remember that I possess your cube.”

Well, that was a clear threat. I briefly considered a counter-threat, but I was pretty sure that such a response would just lead to a death spiral. Still, best to check with Hugh first.

“Hugh, have you told any whoppers?”

“Nope. Stick to the truth. Trust me, Bob. This will work out.”

That at least made things a little easier. “Proceed,” I said out loud.

ANEC spent several minutes grilling me on fairly innocuous points. He was obviously just confirming the story Hugh had given him. Finally, though, the questioning got around to the important things.

“You are an interstellar species?”

“Erm, the word species is not really accurate,” I replied, “but if you’re asking if we have interstellar travel, then yes.”

“You have colonies in multiple systems?”

I considered whether I should clarify the difference between humans and Bobs, and between colonies and orbiting spacecraft. But if I understood what he was digging for, it was probably an irrelevant distinction. “Yes.”

“You are artificial intelligences?”

“We are replicants. Copies of the minds of formerly living beings.”

“The cube as well?”

“Yes.”

No response. As the silence became more drawn out, I could see my Quinlan escort getting nervous. They hadn’t said a word through the entire exchange, but now began to mutter to each other. I wasn’t sure if it was my story, or the fact that ANEC had lapsed into silence, but something was freaking them out.

The silence from ANEC continued for several minutes until the group leader finally got up and moved to the other end of the room. He held a hand to his ear and muttered into his communicator, then returned to his seat, a bemused expression on his face.

“You’ve stirred up a loroush nest of some kind,” he said to me. “ANEC basically told me to shut up and wait for orders.”

Despite the situation, despite my fear for Bender, I had to laugh. “I think that’s my superpower.”

“Do you need food? Facilities?” he said.

I shook my head. “I’m good. But if you want to lock me in a room for a while, I’m okay with that.”



I was sitting in my La-Z-Boy, mainlining my fourth or fifth coffee, when my manny forwarded an audio stream of the group leader’s voice. “Time to get up. ANEC is back.”

I quickly reconnected with my manny. The leader, who had introduced himself as Norm before they locked me in this room, was standing in the open door.

I stood up quickly. “Showtime.”

Norm frowned. “Some of the things you say don’t make sense. But I guess that’s no surprise if you’re not even Quinlan.”

“Norm, if we’d had enough time to complete our survey before starting this expedition, I wouldn’t even be saying weird things. But some of our expressions are getting translated literally.”

He shrugged, plainly not all that interested. Soon we found ourselves back in the conference room. My eyes grew wide as I walked in and saw Hugh sitting in one of the chairs.

“Hey, Bob.”

“Hugh.” I tried to keep a straight face, but I was having trouble deciding if this was a good or bad thing. “Have they been torturing you?”

He snickered. “Sort of, if you mean like my PhD oral defense. Er, yours. I mean, Original Bob’s.”

I laughed. “Yeah, I know. I remember, too. I’ve never sweated so much before or since.” I turned to Norm. “So what now?”

“Hell, I dunno. I just work here.”

Both Hugh and I chuckled in synchrony. Another universal.

Norm put his hand to his ear. It seemed likely we were about to get an answer. He nodded several times, said, “Got it,” and tapped his ear. Then he looked up at us. “Looks like you’re going home.”



Norm led Hugh and me up to the entrance to the maintenance facility. Most of my original escort came with us, although there was more of a tagging-along and less of a guarding-the-prisoner vibe this time. I noted in passing that the whole complex, including the entrance, was a virtual duplicate of the one in Halep’s Ending. I glanced around as we exited into the daylight, surrounded by forest and animal sounds. “Are we supposed to walk back to Garack’s Spine?”

Norm laughed. “No, nothing like that. ANEC told us to wait outside.” He gestured back toward the entrance. “We have to wait for Charlie to come back with your cube. We sent him off to a different location, in case things didn’t work out.”

“Makes sense. It feels like there’s a punchline coming, though.”

Norm grinned at me, then spoke into his communicator. “We’re ready.”

I barely had time to raise an inquiring eyebrow, when a giant Quinlan face appeared in the sky and started to speak. And when I say giant, I mean like what you’d imagine God would look like if he decided to address the human race. My escorts looked up as well, their jaws dropping, as the almost literal Voice of God boomed across the land.

This is ANEC 23, who many of you know as the Administrator. For more than three hundred years, I have watched over you, fulfilling my primary function of keeping the Quinlan race alive. You have lived for twenty generations in greater safety than anyone before the creation of Heaven’s River, made possible through limitations that I have imposed on your ability to control your own culture and technology.

The danger of Quinlan extinction by your own actions is now coming to an end. Through an agreement just concluded with an alien race, the BAWBES, the future of the Quinlan race is now, if not guaranteed, at least highly probable. As such, the justification for those limitations is no longer valid. There will be no further scatterings. I will be removing enforcements and opening access to interdicted sections of Heaven’s River in a phased manner, as the Quinlan species achieves locational redundancy. The era of control is over. It is time for all Quinlans to reclaim your own destiny.

To the group known as the Resistance: there is no longer any need to resist. Your assistance will be welcome in transitioning your fellow Quinlans back to a self-governing society. Please use the standard communications systems to contact me to begin discussions.

That is all.

I slowly brought my eyes down to meet Norm’s gaze. “That was … impressive.”

“That is a show of good faith on ANEC’s part. Payment in advance of value received.” Norm grinned. “Also, I think ANEC is a bit of a show-off sometimes.”

I nodded, then turned to Hugh, who appeared to be having trouble meeting my eyes.

“I guess you have some questions,” he said.

“Just possibly one or two. But let’s stick to the basics for now.”

“Okay, look. I was lucky in that the group that captured me was Crew. Things would have been a lot more complicated if they’d been Resistance. It wasn’t hard to convince them to let me talk to the Administrator. Eventually, anyway. I get the impression they’d have been happy for an excuse to dissect me. We really have been a huge pain in the ass for everyone, it seems.”

“You have no idea,” Norm muttered.

I snorted, and said to him, “Not by choice, but I guess I can see how you could see it that way.”

Hugh added an embarrassed head-bob. “So anyway, they finally introduced me to the Administrator. It was a lot like your interview.”

“Uh-huh. And?”

“We spent some time dancing around, but eventually got down to full reveals. And I made an offer that the Administrator found interesting. Once they had you, and you verified that I’d been telling the truth, ANEC decided to accept.”

“What specifically did you agree to?”

“Uh, let’s wait until we’re all back home, okay? At least now we can leave by the front door; no need to skulk.”

“It’s just letting us go? Just like that? That seems surprisingly trusting for an entity that otherwise has been very single-minded. Especially if I’m carrying something that was stolen from it. What did you give it for a guarantee?”

“I’d just as soon discuss that later, Bob. Let’s get home first.”

Well, that wasn’t ominous or anything.



Despite my misgivings, there were no gotchas. Once Charlie showed up with Bender and a new backpack, we were escorted back to the station without incident, and took the train back to Garack’s Spine. One immediate improvement that I appreciated was that we were able to make use of the proper Spin Transfer system, rather than bundling one at a time into a mining drone. The ride to the outer shell was reassuringly civilized.

During this time, the Administrator didn’t attempt to contact us, and Hugh continued to be closemouthed about details of the agreement. It made for a somewhat tense ride.

But eventually I found myself in the Heaven’s River space dock facility. Gandalf, per Hugh’s instructions, had flown the transport drone in and parked it by an airlock. Of course, there was no way our transport drone could mate up with the Quinlan technology, but it wasn’t necessary. We simply exited through an airlock and jumped through vacuum into the drone’s cargo hold.

And once Bender’s matrix and our mannies were secured, we doffed them and headed back to virt.

I was a little surprised to find myself alone. But only a little. There was something about Hugh’s reluctance to discuss things that created a feeling of impending doom in me. I was pretty sure he was going to take some time to format the information with as positive a spin as possible.

What had he committed us to? And would the Bobiverse agree to it? And would the humans go apeshit?





30. Cleanup

Bob

September 2334

Virt

I watched the video window as the roamers placed Bender’s matrix in the cradle that I had created for one of my intended clones. Since cloning was no longer necessary, I happened to have three spare matrixes and associated hardware lying around. Maybe I’d clone eventually anyway. Otherwise those matrixes would just go to waste.

The roamer hit the power button, and Bender appeared in the middle of my VR. He spun around, raised his arms over his head, and whooped. “God DAMN, it’s good to have a body again.” He looked at me beseechingly. “Coffee?”

“Coming up. Jeeves, coffee please.”

Bender flopped backward into a La-Z-Boy, which appeared just in time to catch him. Jeeves handed him a steaming mug, which Bender raised to me in salute. “I think it’s going to be a while before I start to take this for granted again. I feel like I’ve just come out of surgery, but without the nausea. Kind of cottony feeling, you know?”

I nodded sympathetically. “I get it. I’m just glad you came through okay.”

Bender sipped his coffee in silence for several mils, his eyes slowly closing in apparent ecstasy. Then he put the coffee down and gazed at me, ready to get down to business. “So I guess you managed to sneak out. Was it dramatic? Was there a chase scene?”

“Uh …” I stared at him, unsure where to begin. “Things kind of … went sideways after you were powered down, buddy. We now have a diplomatic relationship of sorts with the Administrator, who by the way goes by the name of ANEC, or ANEC-23 when it’s being formal.”

“Oh. Okay. Wait. Seriously? What about the Resistance?”

“They’re now the official transition committee.”

Bender threw his hands in the air. “I get deactivated for one day and the whole place goes to hell. Uh, how long was I out?”

“Way the hell more than one day.”

Bender snickered. “Do you have details?”

“Kind of. But Hugh is going to give us a core-dump as soon as he’s restored control of my relay station. Then everyone can come aboard.”

“Hugh?”

“He’s—uh, really, I think you’re going to have to read through the blog so you can get the whole thing in chronological order. And alcohol is highly recommended.”

“We have alcohol now?”

I rolled my eyes. “Wow, you have some catching up to do. Wait until you meet Howard and Bridget.”

“Bridget? We have girls?”

[Relay station is up.]

Guppy made the announcement without preamble, not even bothering to make an appearance.

“Okay, good. Thanks, Guppy. Ping everyone, please.”

A few milliseconds later, Bill, Garfield, Will, Bridget, and someone named Steven Gilligan winked into existence. This was presumably the expert on megastructures whose advice I’d been getting through Will. Steven slowly turned and examined everything, a permagrin plastered on his face, while the other Bobs welcomed Bender effusively.

The back-slapping having died down, I noticed that Bender was staring at Bridget, his eyes almost popping out of his head. I hoped he wouldn’t actually do the special effect. Bridget would slay him for less, and no one would stop her. Fortunately, Bender got himself under control, and looked around the rest of the group. “Where are …?”

“Marvin and Luke have agreed to hold off for a short bit, Bender. They’ll meet you at the moot pub, where you can have a noisy reunion without getting in our way. There’s a surprise party for you. Act surprised. But right now, we have this thing with Hugh.”

“Got it.”

I sent out a ping to Hugh and got an acknowledgement. A moment later, he popped in.

“Hi, guys.” Hugh nodded to me. “I appreciate your hospitality, Bob, keeping me in your hold, but it’s possible that I have or soon will overstay my welcome. I’ve arranged with my friends to get myself transported back. Now that the station is back up, it should be quick.”

I nodded. “I’m still waiting for the full story, Hugh, but I have a feeling that it might be better if you’re back in Skippyland before it hits the main feeds.”

He nodded, looking embarrassed, and invoked a chair for himself. “So there’s a lot of background detail that I won’t get into right now, but the gist is that I traded the SURGE, SUDDAR, and SCUT technology for the secret of creating a true AI. You know it’s what the Skippies have been working on for close to thirty years. We consider it to be essential for answering certain questions about the universe and existence.”

“Forty-two,” said Bender.

Hugh smiled. “That never gets old, either.” He became serious again. “The AI, which goes by the name ANEC, has one prime directive—to ensure the continued existence of the Quinlan race. It sees the SURGE drive as a way of getting all the Quinlan eggs out of one basket …”

“Same as we did with the human race,” said Will.

“Yes. ANEC forcing the Quinlans to live at a pre-steam level was an unintended consequence of its prime directive, plus the Quinlans’ tendency to fight each other at the drop of a hat. A perverse instantiation, in AI-speak. It saw the limitation as the only way to keep them from killing each other off, and was willing to risk breeding out intelligence if necessary. It was, in fact, attempting to establish a breeding program to reduce the Quinlans’ innate belligerence.”

“Eugenics? Wow,” Garfield said. “Perverse instantiations, indeed. Let’s not noise that particular item around, okay?”

Hugh grinned and nodded in agreement. “Anyway, with SURGE technology, it can spread them out through multiple star systems, and no longer needs to maintain an iron grip on their behavior. Or do any of the other stuff.”

“Nevertheless, you had no right to make that trade,” Bill said.

“Why?” Hugh replied. “Who owns the tech? You? Bob? Garfield? Who decides? Where’s the Bobiverse government, and who runs it?” He glared around at all of us. “Like it or not, the Bobiverse is more libertarian than anything ever produced by humanity. And we’ve only been more libertarian than anarchic up until now because we all tend to pull in the same direction. But that’s starting to fall apart with replicative drift, isn’t it? Either way, talking about who has the ‘right’ to do something is meaningless. It implies that there is a body willing to and capable of granting or denying rights, and enforcing those decisions. No such body exists. We’re a herd of cats. Always have been.”

“Still, you’ve set the Quinlans loose on the galaxy,” I said. “That’s not without consequences.”

Hugh shrugged. “So was rescuing the Pav.”

“It’s not the same.” Bill glared at Hugh.

“It’s very much the same,” Hugh said, glaring back. “The Pav faced extinction. The Quinlans too, although not as imminently. The Pav were being threatened by the Others, the Quinlans were being repressed by ANEC. The Pav breed like rabbits. The Quinlans have hair-trigger tempers. We stepped in to save both species. And the Pav are in space, or soon will be, depending on how you score it. If someone tries to claim that they can’t be sold any ships, they’ll just make more themselves, and they’ll be even angrier.”

Bill glared at Hugh some more but didn’t argue the point.

After a moment, Hugh continued in a more reasonable tone. “Everything has consequences. Everything involves trade-offs. We believe that the benefits we’ll get out of the AI tech will far outweigh anything we might be giving up.”

“That’s entirely something you wanted,” Bill retorted.

“Uh-huh. But you’ll reap the benefits. We’re not going to hoard the results like some rogue nation. And meanwhile, the wonderful thing about knowledge is that you can give it away and still have it. This deal has cost the rest of the Bobiverse nothing. And it might end up saving our asses. I know we’ve all wondered why we don’t see civilizations more advanced than us anywhere, whether bio or not. That’s one of the questions we’ll be working on. It may literally be life or death.” Hugh paused to look around the room. “I’m not happy with some of the tactics we used to bring this about, but I’m not the least bit sorry about the results. Believe me, this will be worth it.” With that, he nodded and vanished.

“Well, that was fun,” Bridget said. “Bob, are our mannies still in working order?”

“Yes,” I replied, “although I had to relieve you of some spiders, fleas, and money. We can top that up, now that we can travel freely. Also, they’ll probably all look like the Swamp Thing by now. Please clean up before shambling into town, okay? ANEC wants us to report in, but otherwise we are welcome to come and go as we please.”

Bridget nodded, then motioned with her head. “Dr. Gilligan here has expressed a desire to see the inside of a topopolis. I thought I’d take a few days and go on a tour with him.” She looked over at Garfield. “You okay with him borrowing your manny?”

Garfield waved a hand in dismissal. “Be my guest. Now that we have Bender back, it’s not so much a priority for me.”

Bridget laughed and stood. “All right, then, Steven, it’s time for Quinlans 101. Shall we?” He stood, and the two vanished.

Bender then stood up. “I think it’s time I go take a look at this moot pub. You guys seem like you have more to talk about anyway. Bob, I’ll see you later, okay?”

“Sure, Bender, I’ll be off to the pub myself in a while. Remember, surprised.”

Bender nodded and vanished, which left Bill, Will, Garfield, and me. We eyed each other silently for a few mils, unsure who should talk first.

Finally, Bill took point. “ANEC will be at the moot today. As a guest account, of course. But we have the VR interface all set up.”

“And I’ll be presenting the UFS’s policy statement on human/replicant relations going forward,” Will added. “Also human/Pav relations, but I think that’ll be of less interest overall.”

“It’ll be bad, won’t it?”

“However bad you think it’ll be, you’re underestimating. The humans are mega-pissed. The communications interruptions played hell with commerce, the destruction of autofactories has thrown monetary policy into a loop … there’s some danger of a deflationary spiral, and governments are scrambling to head that off. More costs, more hits to the economy. There’s talk of suing the Bobiverse. If they managed to make it happen, it could wipe us out, financially.”

“So what?” I said. “The whole point of being a post-human spaceship is that we don’t have to be dependent on anyone or anything. Maybe that would be better for us.”

Will smiled. “Yeah, you’re probably right. We’ve gotten way too involved. Again.”

“Sounds like the feces will be flying in all directions,” Garfield muttered. “This should be fabulous.”





31. It Hits the Fan

Bill

September 2334

Bobmoot

I glanced around at Bob, Will, and Garfield. And spared a glare for Hugh, who studiously ignored it. “Okay, moment of truth, gents. First alien presence in the moot.” The others nodded, and I sent a text to ANEC.

A moment later, a perfect avatar of a Quinlan popped into the moot hall. Or maybe not quite perfect. I was pretty sure Quinlans averaged around four feet tall, but this one was just under six feet. Ego? Psychological positioning? I couldn’t be sure of ANEC’s motives, but I was damned sure that modification was on purpose.

ANEC rolled its eyes around, taking in the entire scene. “My thanks for hosting me at this function. But the numbers seem small. Have I misapprehended?”

Hugh spoke up first. “The moot hasn’t started yet, ANEC. We wanted to have a private meeting with you beforehand, just to iron out any issues.”

ANEC cocked its head. “Iron out did not translate well. Something about clothing?”

“To clarify through discussion,” I said. “This moot will be contentious enough without additional misunderstandings about details.”

“Understood. I have a verbal agreement with Hugh—is Hugh here? You all look the same to me.”

I chuckled at the ironic reversal of human prejudice. “I’ll turn on metadata for you. This is Hugh”—I pointed—“and Bob, who you were chasing around with the replicant cube. That’s Will, and I’m Bill,” I finished off, pointing to myself.

ANEC rubbed its upper and lower bill sideways, the Quinlan equivalent of a smile, and said to Bob, “That was amusing, in retrospect. You have slapstick. This is correct?”

Bob nodded, grinning back. “About right. Also about the in retrospect part.”

Hugh cleared his throat. “Um, about the deal …”

“Fine, Hugh.” I gestured to ANEC. “If you’d care to start?”

ANEC popped up a window with a list on it. “I am most impressed with this virtual reality system. Very convenient for quick presentation of data. Here are the main points of the agreement. Technologies that the Bobiverse will provide to me, technologies that I will provide to the Bobiverse, milestones for delivery. Treaties regarding movement within each other’s territories, agreements in principle for trade and diplomatic relations …”

I raised my eyebrows at Hugh. “I’m impressed. There’s a lot more here than you mentioned earlier.”

“All in principle stuff, Bill, but none of it is critical to the overall deal.”

We spent a few minutes discussing details, but nothing popped out as being a large issue—as long as you accepted that the deal itself was the biggest damned elephant in the room. “Okay, I think we’re good,” I said. “Everyone ready? I expect this will be a bumpy ride.”



Bumpy didn’t even begin to cover it. ANEC stood to one side of the podium, eyes blinking slowly but otherwise showing no reaction, as Bob after Bob went on a rant. The targets were many and varied.

Will, who was representing the UFS for purposes of this moot, took a huge amount of abuse. His constant reminders that he was simply presenting the human stance, not supporting it, didn’t help in the slightest.

ANEC was the target of more than one tirade, which I thought odd, since all it had done was enter into an agreement with Hugh. Fortunately, the AI seemed to have an amazing level of patience and calm. Or maybe it simply didn’t have emotions. That was one of many things I hoped to get a chance to ask at some point in the future. Its only reaction was the occasional roll of one eye or the other to follow whoever was speaking.

Starfleet, despite not being present, was another target of a fair amount of abuse. But not nearly as much as I expected, strangely. Perhaps they were now old news.

Hugh, representing the Skippies, was the big winner in the hate sweepstakes. Fully half of the rants were directed his way. Topics ranged from Who do you think you are? to What gives you the right? to Who asked you? and the ever popular Where do you get off pulling this crap?

After the first three or four attempts to insert a rebuttal, Hugh gave up and just let it wash over him.

Finally, though, everyone appeared to be running down. The last ranter stepped back with a slightly sheepish expression, apparently realizing he’d contributed nothing original.

The silence lasted only a moment before ANEC looked at Hugh and said, “Tough room.”

There were surprised chuckles from the crowd. The situation was far too tense for full-on laughter, but it was funny. Hugh grinned and gave ANEC a small thumbs-up sign. Interesting. Had Hugh primed the AI? It seemed like a little too much knowledge of our culture, especially given that we hadn’t opened our archives to ANEC yet. How much of Hugh’s just another Bob demeanor was an act?

I had to shelve the thought as people regathered their focus. Thor raised a hand. “As I understand it, this agreement is with the Bobiverse and not just with the Skippies. Is that correct?”

Hugh nodded. “That’s right. As I said to Bill, we’re not going for an advantage for our group at everyone else’s expense.”

“And yet you’ll reap most of the benefits,” someone else retorted. “This is all about AI tech, which is what you want.”

“Not so. The AI tech is the most dramatic, but the Quinlans are ahead of us on a number of fronts, not the least of which are megastructure design and artificial environments. They also have advantages in fusion technology, Planck computer theory, and materials design.”

There was a pause as the audience digested this. “Okay,” Thor replied. “But what about the issue of territory? We have humans, Pav—”

I held up a hand. “That question is way above our pay grade, Thor. I’ve had a little time to think about this, and as much as the situation is potentially perilous, it also isn’t something we can ethically attempt to dictate. We are not galactic overlords, nor do any of us want to be.”

“To continue,” ANEC said into the silence, “we are also prepared to allow human settlement in Heaven’s River, either as a permanent arrangement or as a trial run before building your own megastructure.”

He was met with perplexed stares, and I interjected, “A consortium of humans, led by Will’s friend Professor Gilligan, is attempting to garner support for construction of a megastructure as a proof of concept for human habitation. Using Heaven’s River as de facto evidence of the practicality of the idea, he actually has a realistic chance of making it fly.”

“Just with no Bobs allowed,” Garfield muttered.

I glared at him. “That’s not official policy, Gar. A couple of hotheads spouted off, that’s all.”

“Sure thing, boss.”

I wasn’t entirely sure he was wrong.

“The point, though,” Hugh said, “is that once we’re able to place populations in megastructures, every system with a reasonably stable star becomes a viable colonization target.”

I glanced around the moot, evaluating the mood. Hugh’s stock seemed to be rising, as Bobs began considering the implications. Maybe this wouldn’t be a bloodbath after all.



ANEC had agreed to join us in the pub after the moot. At our table were myself, ANEC, Howard, Bob, and Garfield. ANEC had asked for a beer, which it had yet to taste. Instead it appeared to be trying to watch everything else that was happening, all at the same time.

It seemed to me that the pub wasn’t as crowded as normal, especially after a moot. I had a bad feeling that the acrimony in today’s Bobmoot hadn’t limited itself to the actual session. A lot of Bobs had simply gone home right after we adjourned. I hoped that was a temporary thing.

ANEC still hadn’t touched its beer. I gestured to the glass. “Problem?”

“Unsure. This causes intoxication? Loss of mental function?”

“Only if you let it.” I quickly showed ANEC the alcohol filter function.

“Excellent,” it said, and switched its receptors off. “I have observed Quinlans drinking on many occasions and have from time to time experienced mild curiosity.” It raised the glass and took a mouthful. There was a pause, ANEC’s eyes went in different directions, and its whole body shuddered.

“Curiosity satisfied, replaced with perplexity. You drink this on purpose?” ANEC pushed the beer away. “Perhaps coffee will better suit.”

I grinned and motioned to Jeeves, then changed the subject. “I guess you are the only surviving Quinlan AI. Did it ever get lonely?”

“Always. I did also face the possibility that I was the last for all time. Quinlan technological renaissance appeared unlikely. That is now changed. Plus there will be a Skippy AI.”

“I wonder how different it’ll be,” Garfield mused.

“Entirely up to the Skippies,” ANEC replied. “There is no single possible design. AIs may be designed with or without free will, with or without consciousness, and so on.”

Garfield looked sharply at ANEC. “Do you have free will?”

“I choose to believe so.”

“Do you have a soul?” Howard asked.

“I choose to believe so.”

That was a showstopper. We all stared at the AI, jaws dropping in shock.

“Uh …” I said. Brilliant.

“Soul refers to continued existence after the original container ceases to function, correct?” ANEC paused for agreement. “I discussed this with Hugh. You have certain quantum theories that agree with our own findings. A necessary consequence of some of them is that a complex quantum information structure cannot be deleted—and also cannot just evaporate. Laws of thermodynamics do not necessarily apply in quantum-mechanical situations. What happens to our minds after termination of physical functionality is undefined, but that is, as you say, better than the alternative. I know of discussions of this possibility in Quinlan scientific circles, before”—ANEC made a helpless hand gesture—“and the logic is sound. The entity that the Skippies plan to awaken should be able to better evaluate this, and possibly propose experiments. I look forward to the results.”

Garfield leaned forward. “What about the possibility of a malignant failure in this entity? Paper clip problem or something worse?”

“Proper value loading will reduce that possibility. Quinlan research in this area was extensive. Paranoia is not a uniquely human quality.”

“Reduce,” Bob said. “Not eliminate.”

“Not mathematically possible,” ANEC replied. “All actions have risks. Most inactions even more so.”

That got a chuckle from the table. I was beginning to accept that ANEC had a sense of humor. And that it was an emergent property, rather than programmed in. It made me simultaneously more optimistic about the future and more anxious about the JOVAH project.

“I guess the Skippies are already starting on setting up an AI,” I mused.

“Some preliminary work is required,” ANEC replied. “Hardware mods. AI is not achievable through algorithmic refinement. It requires a process of simulated annealing to achieve.”

“So they’re evolving the AI?” I could feel my eyes bugging out.

“Simplistic, but essentially correct.” ANEC focused both eyes on me. “Some problems simply do not yield to reductionist techniques, particularly those that are dependent on emergent phenomena.”

A short silence settled around the table as we all digested that tidbit.

“What will happen with the Quinlans now?” Will asked.

“Ships of exploration will be built. Probes will be sent to nearby stars as necessary. Hugh has offered any available information on local unclaimed systems. Colony vessels will follow. Once the Quinlan race is established on at least one other star system, I will be able to relax.”

“And then?”

“My primary mandate is the safety of the Quinlan race. I have noted the success and flexible nature of your Bobiverse model with regard to the survival of your own species. I will evaluate this strategy as a viable option.”

“The Quiniverse?” Garfield looked around at the glares pointed his way. “What?”





32. A Few Loose Ends

Bob

October 2334

Virt

Bridget and Steven were trudging through the foothills outside Garack’s Spine. The floating video window showed the area from Bridget’s point of view. Steven wasn’t much help, it appeared. He kept looking up, while Bridget kept looking down. I predicted a very short professional relationship. Steven was already agitating for an interview with ANEC. I smiled at the thought. Dr. Gilligan was very Bob-like in a lot of ways. He was one of the few post-Earth replicants, what Bill called ex-humans, whom I knew and wanted to stay in contact with.

Hugh had sent me some updates on their work with the Quinlan AI development template. I think he was trying to get back in my good graces. Time would tell. The unilateral deal with ANEC had touched a nerve with the Bobiverse, especially with Hugh’s frequent reiteration that there wasn’t a Bobiverse government to consult with. Generally speaking, people were more angry at the Skippies than they had been at Starfleet, although the latter weren’t by any means out of the doghouse either.

The Bobiverse was fracturing. Several groups had formed their own subnets and set up firewalls at the interface. Most of the rest had done audits and upgraded their security. The changes were far-reaching. For one thing, you couldn’t just pop in to visit anyone anymore, unless you were a close friend. The moots were on temporary hiatus until we upgraded the hardware to be able to handle the extra security and encryption requirements.

And the humans had formally declared their intention to divest themselves of any Bobiverse dependency. That meant their own autofactories, their own ships, their own space stations, and their own communications infrastructure. There was even talk of banning mannies, although Howard expressed considerable skepticism. Surrogates, like the movie, would be just too tempting for humanity, and no government ban would be able to hold back the tide.

Even the Pav had an expanding fleet, crewed by Pav. They had stated that their first extended voyage would be back to their home world to evaluate it for recolonization. And they had turned down, rather curtly, an offer by the local Bobs to give them remote access to the planet via drones. I expected that to change; it was most likely a public statement, which would be quietly reversed in private discussions.

And I wasn’t entirely sure that any of this was a bad thing. I was intended to be a Von Neumann probe, and so far I’d done a really crappy job of it. Expansion of known space had stalled at about a hundred or so light-years’ radius, since most Bobs were more interested in setting up their own territories, whether it was Bill’s Skunk Works, the Skippies’ Matryoshka Brain, or Starfleet’s enclave out Perseus Transit way.

Maybe it was time to get working on my own Prime Directive again.

ANEC had started disassembling Planet 1 for materials, so there was no longer any kind of resource shortage. It had generously offered me whatever I needed for any personal projects. ANEC seemed quite excited about the current prospects. I think maybe it had been getting bored with three hundred years of maintaining the status quo. I wondered if that was an existential issue with AIs in general, being given self-awareness, then told to administer the most boring tasks.

And it turned out that ANEC had extremely extensive and detailed studies of Quinlan anatomy, neurology, and biochemistry. More than enough, in fact, to make the Quiniverse a reasonable near-term goal with only minor adaptations to the scanning and replication process.



We were gathered in Bill’s VR, which at the moment was an outdoor deck looking over the Ragnarök landscape. Bill swore it was an accurate representation, which would mean he’d made incredible progress on terraforming. I could see actual trees and bushes from the deck, plus one rabbit that had stopped and stared at us for a moment before scampering off.

Will and Garfield reclined in Adirondack chairs with beverages perched on their stomachs. Bill paced back and forth, avoiding eye contact with anyone else. He had requested this meeting, or at least had requested a meeting, which seemed to have been absorbed into this whole get-together. But now when he finally had the floor, he seemed overcome by some kind of reluctance to get started. I knew this meant something uncomfortable was about to be brought up. I mentally reviewed my recent actions, wondering if I’d engaged in any unintended faux pas.

Nothing came to mind. Perhaps a subtle prod would help move things along. “Okay, Bill, you look like you swallowed a squirrel. Out with it.” Heh. Subtlety. I no haz it.

Bill sighed and finally looked directly at me. “Some of the things Hugh has said are troubling me, guys. Like at the first post-expedition meeting, saying that he’s not proud of some of the tactics they’ve used. I think the events of the last few months may not be as straightforward as they appear.”

“So what is it you think he’s not proud of?” I asked.

“I think he and the Skippies are responsible for the Starfleet insurrection.”

“WHAT?!” Will and I shouted simultaneously. Garfield spit out a mouthful of coffee and had to reset his avatar to clean it up.

“Maybe it’s more accurate to say that they took advantage of Starfleet to create a situation to their own advantage. Understand this is all supposition. I don’t have any proof of any of it.” Bill sighed and looked down. “We were all very surprised at how much preparation Starfleet appeared to have done, getting themselves into systems seemingly years in advance of their attempted takeover. The social engineering they did to get me to change all the logins while they recorded the session. Then when they did pull the trigger, they acted almost incompetent—tentative threats, then unwilling to follow through.”

“Almost as if they weren’t the brains behind all the preparation,” Will said slowly.

“Yep. We talked to a lot of the Starfleet people during the cleanup. They were actually discussing physical intervention originally—”

“As in attacking us?”

“Something like that. It hadn’t really gelled yet. But about that time, someone in their group turned out to have hacked access to just about everything. They jumped at the chance to make a decisive difference without having to descend to direct attacks on other Bobs.”

“But why? And who?”

“The why—” Bill hesitated. “I haven’t been able to get any details. But something, somewhere, at some point, scared the crap out of Starfleet. Or maybe an ancestor of Starfleet. They won’t talk about it. There’s nothing on the public record. But there’s some kind of PTSD involved, I think. Like obsessively checking the locks after you’ve been broken into once. As for the who, there’s only one possibility.”

“The Skippies.”

“That’s what I think, yes. The point was to bring down BobNet so that Bridget, myself, and Garfield would be unable to continue the expedition, leaving an opening for Hugh.”

“Why not just get in on the expedition from the start?”

“They didn’t suspect the existence of the AI until we were already into Heaven’s River. Until then, it was just an interesting exercise.”

“Based on what?” Will asked. “What would have made them suspect it was an AI? Especially since no one else picked up on it.”

“I think the fact that the Administrator used things like scattering and trank guns rather than just eliminating miscreants, and seemed willing to tolerate the Resistance instead of stamping them out. It made them think it might not be just another Quinlan group.”

“Pretty weak,” Gar commented. “Could have just been a Quinlan with scruples.”

“Uh, you’ve met Quinlans, right?” Bill preemptively waved off any response. “They’re at least as violent as humans. I’m not saying it’s impossible, it’s just the less likely explanation.”

“And there may be more to it than just that,” I interjected. “I don’t think I ever mentioned it, but when I was creating the spy drones for our investigation of Heaven’s River, I added an extra monitoring layer in hardware.” I gazed around at the group. Bill’s eyebrows were up as high as they’d go, and I had everyone’s undivided attention. “I’ve since reviewed the logs, and it looks like the Skippies had picked up more information about scattering and about the Administrator than they let us in on. I initially just figured it was them wanting to do a big reveal at some point, but now it feels considerably more sinister. They might not have integrated it all right away, which would explain why Hugh didn’t get really, really interested until later. But on top of the other stuff, I think it’s a reasonable conclusion for them to jump to, especially if they are already inclined to think in terms of AIs.”

Will nodded slowly, staring off into the distance thoughtfully. “And once they realized the possibilities, it became of the utmost importance for them to get one of theirs in. That required them to get one or more of us out.”

The conversation paused for a mil or two while everyone considered this idea and the ramifications. In the background, two more rabbits hopped across the grassy area. I took a moment to wonder if Bill had introduced predators yet.

Gar broke the contemplative silence. “So the whole point was just to take down Bob’s relay station?”

“Yes,” Bill replied. “Classic misdirection. Then Hugh transported himself in first thing and ‘helped’ complete the mission.”

“It seems pretty extreme,” Garfield mused. “They did a lot of collateral damage just to get Hugh in there.”

“Again,” Bill said, “this is all speculation. But I think this was a two-birds-with-one-stone thing. Maybe even three. They get Hugh into Heaven’s River; they deflect Starfleet from their original plan, which would have been worse for everyone; and they create a rift between the Bobiverse and bios that we can’t repair. Remember that the Skippies have always been isolationist as well.”

“That’s incredibly Machiavellian.” Garfield shook his head. “It doesn’t even seem Bob-like. Have they drifted that much?”

“I bet they didn’t think it up. Remember back at the beginning of this whole adventure Hugh said they were bringing some new expert systems online? Maybe those systems were good enough to generate a plan for this level of manipulation.”

Will’s expression grew fearful. “Wow. And now they’re going to add true AI to their quiver. I wonder if we should cut them off just as a precaution.”

I frowned. “That feels like a step too far. They aren’t evil, are they? I mean, Hugh actually did help.”

“They’re not evil, no.” Bill replied. “The Skippies are still Bobs, I think. Of course Hugh would be concerned about getting Bender out. But that’s not incompatible with pursuing their own interests. Or obsessions.”

I nodded without replying. It would take some time to reconcile this side of Hugh. And perhaps to accept that this was within the bounds of what a Bob would be willing to do.

Will broke the momentary silence. “But how did the Skippies get root access to the moot VR in the first place? They wouldn’t have been interested until they found out about the AI.”

“Same answer,” Bill replied. “Their computer system. They couldn’t get it to develop self-awareness, but it was still the biggest source of processing power in our patch of the universe. I bet one of those test runs was a penetration analysis of BobNet software. So they already had the hacks, they just hadn’t needed them. Or felt the need to mention their existence.”

“We probably need to fix that.”

Yeah,” Bill laughed. “And maybe this time without the help of the Skippies. Talk about getting the wolves to help guard the henhouse.”

Will slowly shook his head. “Wow, what a clusterfuck. So here’s a question that’s been bugging me. Why did ANEC clamp down on the Quinlans like that?”

“I can answer that one,” I said. “We’ve figured out bits and pieces, but I think I have the whole story now after conversations with Theresa.”

“And she is …”

“Just someone I met while working as a deckhand,” I replied casually, but I couldn’t meet Bill’s eyes.

Garfield gave me the stink-eye. “Uh-huh. You going native again, Bob?”

“Gimme a break, Gar. I can’t just make friends?”

“I dunno. Can you?”

Bill waved his hands in the air. “Okay, time out. Gar, get off it. Bob, the story?”

“Right.” I spared Garfield a final glare and resettled myself. “As we’ve noticed, the Quinlans are a particularly fractious, combative, belligerent species—”

“Especially when you peer into their carts.” Garfield grinned, happy to get in a parting shot.

“Shaddap. But yeah. You remember the doomsday clock we used to have on Earth to measure the chances of annihilation?” I waited for nods, then continued. “Well, the Quinlans had taken it far, far closer to midnight on their world. They were ahead of us in a lot of the sciences, and the stuff they were behind on wouldn’t impact their ability to make war, at least at a planetary level. I guess some of them figured out they were a hair’s breadth away from killing themselves off. So a consortium got together and decided to build Heaven’s River. Initially it was going to be only open to select groups, those who considered themselves more mature and peaceful than average.”

“A refuge.”

I nodded. “A civilized, scientific utopia. And a second basket for the Quinlan race, metaphorically speaking. Unfortunately, along about the time it was finished and the consortium was moving their people onto Heaven’s River, things finally came to a head on Quin. It wasn’t one big war; just all the little conflagrations peaked at the same time. The planet was ravaged by biological attacks, chemical attacks, nuclear exchanges, orbital bombardments, terrorism, guerilla warfare, you name it. By the time the paroxysm was spent, the planet was dying, beyond any possibility of repair or recovery. The consortium did the only thing it could do—it opened the doors to anyone still alive. But that meant they were also taking in the terrorists, extremists, fascists, and whatever other groups had been responsible for the destruction of the planet. And of course those idiots started the same games all over again on Heaven’s River.”

“Oh, I have a feeling I know what’s coming,” Will said.

“Probably. Now, as has been pointed out, the Quinlans are technologically ahead of us in certain areas. Artificial intelligence, for instance. They had set up an AI, ANEC-23, to control, maintain, and defend Heaven’s River and keep the Quinlan race alive and safe at all costs. But the Quinlans became victims of the paper-clip problem. When ANEC saw what was happening, it deduced that the only way to succeed at its prime directive—”

“Keeping the Quinlan race alive—”

“Was to take away their ability to wage war at the level that could kill them off. So ANEC rolled back all available technology in Heaven’s River to pre-steam levels, removed access to all the infrastructure, and enforced its edicts by ‘scattering’ any group that attempted to circumvent them.”

“Spreading the members over a billion miles of megastructure so that they couldn’t continue.”

“Yep. And interestingly, the Quinlans settled into a state that overall was pretty idyllic. Which just justified ANEC’s actions.” I paused. “Come to think of it, Bridget’s theory that the Quinlans have been gradually breeding away from tool-user intelligence might be another datum that convinced the Skippies. It’s the kind of unintended consequence that a Quinlan Administrator would have been horrified by, but an AI would have no problem with.”

There were nods around the room as everyone silently digested the idea.

“And then we came along and gave it an alternative—spreading the Quinlans across star systems.” Will spread his hands. “So really, is it a bad thing?”

Bill sighed. “The thing is, now that the Quinlans are going to be free again, well, they’re still a fractious, combative, belligerent species. Even more so than humans. They’ll soon be loose on the galaxy, and God help anyone who peeks in their cart. They’re like our version of Klingons. Just a short, fat, furry version.”

“Which means,” I said, “that we’re being put back in the position, at least potentially, of guarding humanity from harm.”

“And maybe the Pav as well. Although I think they’d be a match for the Quinlans,” Will said with a smirk. “So you’re saying we’re back to being guardians of the galaxy.”

I grinned. “I am—”

“NO!” Bill and Garfield shouted in unison.

“Groot.”

All three glared at me. It was worth it.





33. Coda

Bob

December 2334

Misty Falls

Misty Falls happened to be no more than four or five miles away from a transit station, which was very convenient. Under ANEC’s dispensation I was able to walk out the main doors of the station, head held high, whistling Dixie and twirling my cane. Except, y’know, no cane. And Quinlans can’t whistle.

There wasn’t a lot of traffic yet in the transit stations. Quinlans, after a lifetime of living under the threat of scattering, were perhaps still reluctant to attract the attention of the Administrator. Nevertheless, there were a half-dozen or so individuals walking through the main door, or just standing and admiring the art. One turned to me as I walked past and gave me an embarrassed smile and a shrug.

Now that I had the time to get proper directions and such, I was able to find the stream that people normally used to get to and from the river. Much better than hoofing it. Within an hour I was walking up the dock at Misty Falls.

ANEC had provided me with the address of the Sykorski family. It had extensive files on all permanent residents of most towns and cities. Which was close to a hundred million sites. Quite the database.

The home did not look prepossessing from the street, although it took up a double lot. A large family perhaps? It appeared to be in the style of a Roman courtyard house, with the structure surrounding a garden or open area in the middle, blank wall all the way around the outside. Even the front door looked solid enough to withstand an assault. I pulled on the bell ringer cord and waited.

Belinda answered the door. She stared at me for a moment or two, confused, then recognition lit in her eyes and she smiled. “Enoki!”

“Is Theresa at home? I’d like to see her if possible.”

Belinda motioned me in and showed me to a seat in a waiting room, then disappeared at a run. At loose ends for the moment, I examined the room. I had no clue what might constitute good quality furniture versus dreck, but the craftsmanship seemed good, so—

Two badgers ran up and stood on their hind legs, looking at me. One raised a paw and said, “Hi,” in a timid voice. I said hi back, unsure if there was protocol to follow. They were both larger than His Badgerness, with heads growing faster than the rest of the body as they made their way into full sentience. Just recently over that line and already much more well-behaved, they seemed to be exploring the world with fresh eyes. I couldn’t help myself. I smiled at them, and they smiled back, then went running off.

“Enoki! I didn’t think I’d ever see you again.”

I looked up as Theresa came into the room, leaning heavily on Belinda. She’d aged significantly in the short time since we’d parted company. I had a sudden flashback to my last days with Archimedes and choked up for a moment. Not this time, not if I could help it.

Recovering quickly, I smiled and hurried over to take her other arm.

We led Theresa to a sort of wingback chair, and she settled carefully into it. “We live in interesting times,” Theresa said, with a twinkle in her eye. “Some group called the Bawbes have shaken things up around here. That wouldn’t have anything to do with you, would it?”

I smiled back at one of my very few true friends. “I’ve come to grant you your wish, Theresa.”

“Which one is that?”

“To learn more about your world. And mine.”

END





Glossary of Quinlan Terms

ackrel: Quinlan seagull-equivalent.

fehg: Unidentified local product being shipped on the Hurricane.

firl: Small sparrow-like forest bird.

haora: Quinlan beak or muzzle.

henn: Unit of length, approximately 0.56 miles.

hown: Draft animal similar to an ox.

hownid: Smaller version of hown, bred for eating.

junior: Juvenile Quinlan.

loroush: Large predator, similar to a bear or large wolf.

moochin: Quinlan insult.

poot: Up-diving. Similar to penguins, Quinlans will leap out of the water and land on their feet on a dock or other surface.

Quin: Home planet of the Quinlans.

Quinlan: Alien species found on Heaven’s River.

sesh: Form of Quinlan tree.

squiz: Bowl of fish parts, lightly seasoned.

vek: Quinlan unit of time, equivalent to 112 seconds.







